【八月五日　港獨集會　陳浩天發言 #1】 (Chan Ho-tin's Speech #1 in the Hong Kong
Independence Rally on Aug 5)

抄本：Thomas
英譯：Sidney

陳浩天：
各位唔好意思啊，好明顯呢係一個技術問題啦。噉就頭先有聲嘅，噉搞完一輪之後呢，就變
左有畫就無聲。噉，好對唔住啦。噉依段片本來係講一個關於過去，現在，將來。希望陣間
有機會播比大家睇啦。噉雖然個screen就好細，但係我哋都有對白，都有內容，大家能夠聽
得到。

Chan Ho-tin：
Sorry everybody, we had a technical issue here. The audio was working just now,
but now the picture works but the audio failed. So, sorry about that. This
video is about the past, the present, and the future. I hope we can show you
the video in a moment. Although the screen is really small, there are dialogues
and we have (audio) content, everybody can hear it.

依日喺臨開始依個集會之前呢，就有一位女士走埋黎一見到我突然間就開始流眼淚。佢就話
，佢好痛心好傷心，見到香港依家噉樣。同埋好痛心我哋依班年青人遭受嘅一切。佢話當年
睇住由打貪污、捉葛柏，香港越黎越繁盛，越黎越穩定，不斷向上，成為亞洲嘅其中一個龍
頭。但今時今日，佢又睇住佢不斷噉樣淪落，由九七年淪陷之後，到到依家。我相信大家已
經知道或者察覺得到，而家嘅香港，已經唔再係我哋認識嘅香港。舊嘅香港，已經慢慢哋過
去。依十九年黎，我哋不斷比人壓榨，不斷被折磨。比依個政府去殖民，去折磨我哋。

Today, before this assembly began, a woman came up to me in tears. She said,
she is really really saddened and heartbroken to witness what Hong Kong has
become. And she is pained to see what youngsters like us had to go through. She
said she witnessed the anti-corruption campaign, she witnessed the conviction
of Peter Godber, she witnessed Hong Kong become more and more stable and
prosperous, and ultimately becoming a leading economy in Asia. But today, she
witnessed the continual downfall of Hong Kong, ever since the occupation in
1997. I believe you already know, or have already noticed, the Hong Kong we see
today is not the Hong Kong that we knew. The Hong Kong of old has already
slowly passed away. In these 19 years, we have been continuously suppressed and
tortured. We’ve been colonized by them, tortured by them.

三跑、高鐵、醫委會，校委會、依家嘅選舉(管理)委員會，去取消我哋嘅資格。每個禮拜都
有一單新嘅新聞，都係大新聞，但係無一單係好㗎。香港就係面臨噉嘅情況，今次，我哋五
位嘅參選人被取消資格，其實只係冰山一角。之前已經不斷發生左好多事情，岩岩提過嘅醫
委會，校委會，到到今次。

The third runway, “high-speed” rail, medical council, the HKU council, and now
the Electoral Affairs Commission, they disqualified us. Big events are reported
in the news every week, and none of them are good news. We are now facing this
situation in Hong Kong. Today, five of us have been disqualified from the
election, but this is just the tip of the iceberg. Many things have happened
before, like the medical council, HKU council, and then this.

我哋不斷去尋找我哋嘅路，我哋見到依一切一切嘅淪落，我哋好想搵條出路。而我自己覺得
，香港獨立，就係我哋唯一嘅出路。有好多人話要自決．要自主。點解大家會覺得要自決，
要自主呢？以前都無依樣野。就係因為大家覺得依家唔得呀嘛，就係覺得依家香港越黎越唔
掂呀嘛。

We are seeking a way to reverse the downfall of Hong Kong, we really want to
find a way out. And I personally think that, Hong Kong Independence is our only
way out. A lot of people advocate for self-determination or self-rule.  Why do
they believe in self-determination and self-rule now? We never talked about
these ideas before. Because the current situation is dreadful, we are
witnessing the demise of Hong Kong.


我哋要搵個新嘅方向，搵條出路，所以我哋要自決，同埋自主。但係，有啲咩選擇啫？你自
決有咩選擇，我希望大家諗清楚有啲乜野選擇。唔通你要成為一個中國嘅直轄市咩？定係維
持一國兩制？大家就係覺得依家一國兩制唔得所以先要搵個新嘅出路呀嘛，噉你只能夠揀，
中國嘅直轄市，一係就香港獨立。

We need to find a new direction, find a way out. That’s why we have to call for
self-determination, self-rule. Yet, what are our choices? What choices do you
have in order to achieve self-determination? I want everybody to think
carefully about this. Surely you aren’t proposing we become a direct-controlled
municipality of China? Surely you aren’t talking about maintaining the status
quo of “One Country, Two Systems”? We are seeking a new way out, precisely
because the status quo of so called “One Country, Two Systems” does not work.
So you can only either choose to place Hong Kong directly under China’s
control, or, Hong Kong Independence.

我就會選擇香港獨立。
I will choose Hong Kong Independence.

今次選委會去取消我哋嘅資格，一個政治嘅篩選，令到好多香港人都好憤怒。今日好多謝唔
同嘅人士前來啦。我相信有泛民啦，有無乜政治背景，可能對於政治唔認識，對時事都唔認
識嘅但係今次都會出黎啦。當然仲有本土派啦，制憲派啦，同埋我哋獨立派啦。噉有唔同嘅
嘉賓，好多謝大家。大家嘅政治立場，政見可能都有唔同，但係今次，依個係公約數，我哋
為咗香港好，為左我哋嘅自由，依個喺我哋嘅公約數。今日，我哋就齊集喺依一度，我覺得
今次嘅事件，依個選(管)委會去取消我哋資格依個事件，其實，喺代表咗黑夜來臨。

The Electoral Affairs Commission (sic) disqualified us from running in the
election. This political screening enraged a lot of Hong Kongers. Today, I
thank you all for coming here. Among you are people from all political spectra.
I believe there are pan-democrats; and there are people with no political
background, or perhaps you aren’t familiar with politics and current events,
but you still came here. Of course there are the localists, the
constitutionalists, and us, the independentists. We also have various guests,
thank you everybody. Our political stances and beliefs may be different, but
today, our common denominator, is that we want to do good for Hong Kong, we
want to fight for our own freedom and rights. This is our common denominator.
Today, we have gathered here, because we strongly feel that our
disqualification by the Electoral Affairs Commission (sic), is an indication
that darkness has fallen upon us.

我哋面對緊嘅將來，其實，我見唔到越黎越好囉香港。今次依件事係赤裸裸嘅一個打壓，政
治嘅打壓，我見唔到，黎緊嘅香港會變得越黎越好。黑夜已經來臨，之前嘅三跑高鐵，只係
代表黑夜來臨緊，但係今次依件事，係代表黑夜已經來臨。好多人希望今次能夠話，藉住依
件事件，去搞一場暴動，或者一啲衝擊，去比啲顏色個政府睇，或者我哋要反抗。

When we look at the future, I cannot see Hong Kong becoming better. This
incident is a blatant political suppression. I cannot see how Hong Kong will
become better. Darkness has already fallen upon us. The third runway, the
high-speed rail, those incidents only show that darkness is looming over us,
but this incident, means that darkness has already arrived. A lot of people
hope that this incident will trigger a riot, or an assault on the government,
or a revolt.

但係，好無奈就係，我希望大家能夠明白，我哋暫時嘅實力依然未足夠，我哋人數未足夠。
我唔希望，我哋民族黨係會㧬一班人去死。就係話，我哋依家搞場暴動啦，但係結果係點呢
？好多人被捕啦，好似梁天琦啦，黃台仰啦。上次，佢哋已經犧牲左，前路茫茫，隨時比人
判十年八年，我唔希望貿貿然去㧬大家去死，發洩完就算，然後消耗左民氣就算。我唔希望
係噉，所以，民族黨作出一個好重大嘅決定同埋好艱難嘅決定，就係今次要搞一個普通嘅集
會，一個和平嘅集會。

But, unfortunately, I hope everybody will understand, we do not have sufficient
power yet. We don’t have enough people. I don’t want us, National Party, to
send a group of people to their demise for nothing. Let’s assume we start a
riot now. But what will be the result? Many people being arrested, like Edward
Leung, Ray Wong. Last time, they have already paid the price. Their future is
uncertain, they might get a hefty sentence -- ten years, eight years. I don’t
want to send you off to sacrifice for nothing, just to vent our anger, just to
use up all our morale. I don’t want things to end up like this, so, National
Party made a critical and difficult decision: this time, we will hold a normal
assembly, a peaceful assembly.

我哋唔希望，貿貿然去消耗大家嘅民氣，我哋希望係藉住今次嘅依個和平集會，去調節番大
家對未來嘅想像，我哋嘅手法，我哋嘅手段嘅想像。我哋希望藉住今次依個集會，能夠將獨
派或者本土派送上一個健康發展嘅道路。我哋藉住依啲集會，我哋能夠不斷建立我哋嘅勢力
，越滾越大。過往嘅集會嘅問題，就係會固步自封啦，集到去一個人數都好，我哋都唔會有
咩行動。或者甚至有人去行動嘅時候，會有人去阻止。但係我哋民族黨或者我哋獨派嘅集會
，係唔會嘅。如果到有足夠嘅群眾，足夠嘅人數，大家，你哋覺得要有啲行動嘅時候，覺得
時機係到嘅時候，我哋係絕對唔會阻止，依個係我哋嘅分別。

I don’t want you to needlessly waste and expend the good morale that we have
here. I hope that with this peaceful assembly, we can adjust our imagination of
the future, of our means, and of our methods. I hope that with this assembly,
we can send Localism onto a healthy path of development. With peaceful
assemblies like these, we can continue to build our influence, and have it
continuously snowball. The problem with rallies in the past is complacence.
Even if there is a large number of participants, no action whatsoever is taken.
Sometimes, when people make an initiative, they will be obstructed by others.
But our assemblies, the pro-independence assemblies, are different. If we had a
sufficiently large crowd, and if you believe it is time to take any action, we
will never obstruct you. This is what makes us different.

我哋做嘅集會，唔係消耗民氣，我哋做嘅集會，係激勵士氣。今日，我哋咁多人喺度，依個
係我哋香港史上第一個香港獨立嘅大型集會，係第一次，歷史性嘅一次。不過，我想講嘅係
，岩岩我提到，黑夜已經來臨，我哋唔知仲有無機會可以好似依家噉樣，再一次噉樣嘅集會
，可能聽日已經唔得喇。好容易㗎喳，佢唔需要立法，佢只話我哋因為依個公眾安全嘅問題
，我哋唔批不反對通知書，任何人黎集會嘅話，我哋就會拘捕佢，佢就係非法集會，噉樣我
哋就唔能夠有噉樣嘅集會。

The assemblies that we hold are not to waste your morale. They are to boost
your morale. Today, we have so many people here. This is the first major
pro-independence gathering in Hong Kong’s history. This is the first time, a
historical first. But as I just said, darkness has fallen upon us. I don’t know
whether we will have any chance to hold such an assembly again. Perhaps it will
be banned starting from tomorrow. It’s very easy. They don’t have to pass any
laws. They can just refuse to issue a “notice of no objection” due to “public
order” concerns. Anyone who still come to the gathering will be deemed to have
taken part in an unlawful assembly, and will be arrested. This way, we will be
unable to hold a gathering like this.

黑夜，將會來臨。我哋可能要秘密結社，哋下組織，連講都唔能夠講，唔能夠搞依家噉樣嘅
集會。所以，我哋必須去襯黑夜來臨嘅時候，來臨之前，我哋要準備好自己，我哋嘅獨派，
唔再停留喺社運團嘅階段。我哋唔再停留喺搞社運，我哋依家係進入一個政治，我哋係搞政
治呀。


Darkness will come. We may have to form secret societies, underground
societies. We will be banned from speak about it. We will be banned from
holding these assemblies. So, we must prepare ourselves before darkness comes.
We, the independentists, will not stay at the “social activist” stage. We will
not linger with social movements, we will enter the political arena. We are
doing politics!

各位，我哋要準備去接管依個社會，我哋接管自己嘅將來，香港將會交到我哋嘅手上。我哋
香港過往嘅民主道路，最大嘅問題就係得反對，無諗過要執政嘅。無諗過(咪收唔到)香港，
所以我哋係無希望無方向，但係，依家各位，你哋搵到方向，搵到希望，就係香港獨立。依
個，係我哋嘅唯一出路。我哋只要揸緊依個信念，喺黑夜黎臨之後，我哋堅持依個信念，無
論我哋係要秘密結社又好，地下組織又好，我哋要做啲乜野都好，我哋都堅持依個信念，認
住你隔離個個，將來，同佢一齊行依一條路。黑夜來臨之後，無一個人能夠倖免，每一個香
港人，都唔能夠倖免。佢哋到依家依一刻，可能都唔知道香港發生緊咩事，佢哋覺得依然好
安好，但將來，佢哋都會遭殃，都唔能夠倖免。到個個時候，佢哋就要同佢講，希望係咩？
就係香港獨立。香港獨立，就係我哋嘅出路。無錯，黑夜喺會來臨，但係，黎明最終都係會
來臨。我知道香港獨立最終都係會發生，因為我哋香港人係永不言敗嘅，我哋係唔會放棄，
我哋都唔會再返轉頭喇，我哋被中國殖民之後，我哋已經好厭惡中國，唔會再番轉頭，唔會
再認自己係中國人。我哋，一定要殺出自己一條血路。希望大家，堅持依個信念，希望大家
明白，點解我哋要搞一次，依一次嘅集會，我哋要壯大我哋嘅聲勢。民族黨，將會成為執政
黨，然後各位，將要接管香港依個地方，我哋要管理依個地方，大家要做好準備。

Everyone, we have to prepare to take over the governance of this society. We
will take control over our future, Hong Kong will place its future on our
hands. In the past, the biggest problem in the democracy movement is that they
never dreamed of becoming the ruling party. They haven’t (microphone fails)
Hong Kong, therefore we lost hope and lost direction. But now, you have found
your direction, you have found hope, and it is the Independence of Hong Kong.
This is our only way out. As long as we hold onto our beliefs, even after
darkness falls upon us, we will persevere. Look at the people on your left, on
your right. We will walk on the same path together. When darkness comes, nobody
will be spared. Nobody in Hong Kong will be spared. Some may think Hong Kong is
still doing well, but in the future, they will feel the pain too. They will not
be spared. That is when we will tell them: What is our hope? Our hope is for
Hong Kong Independence. Hong Kong Independence is our way out. Indeed, darkness
will fall upon us, but, dawn will come eventually. We know Hong Kong
Independence will happen eventually, because Hong Kongers never give up, and we
will never backtrack on our paths. After colonization by China, we know we hate
them, we will never go back and identify ourselves as Chinese. We must blaze a
new trail for ourselves. I hope everybody will hold onto this belief. I hope
everybody understands why we held this assembly. We have to gain momentum and
recognition. The National Party will become the ruling party. And then all of
you will take over the governance of Hong Kong. We will govern this place.
Everybody should make preparations for this.

噉，都仲有好多嘉賓精彩嘅發言，噉我唔會曬大家時間。有一樣野，喺大家必須要做嘅，就
係，我哋要嗌番幾聲。我哋要激勵我哋自己嘅士氣，記住今日依一刻，歷史性嘅依一刻，我
哋聽日就會出現喺國際嘅新聞上面，起碼環球時報先啦。噉，環球啦，好國際啦。大家準備
好未呀？聽日上頭條喎。

Next up, our honorable guests are going to make their speeches, so I won’t
waste your time any longer. But there’s one thing we have to do. We should
shout slogans. We need to boost our own morale. Remember this moment, this
historical moment. We will appear on international news tomorrow. At least
we’ll appear on Global Times (a subsidiary of People’s Daily). Global news.
International news. Are you prepared for it? We’ll make headlines tomorrow.

(嗌口號)香港獨立！
(Shouts)Hong Kong Independence!

噉依家呢，我哋段片呢，就應該準備好喇。雖然啲畫面大家都睇唔到，再一次道歉，真係唔
好意思，我哋將來會做得更加好㗎，因為我哋真係無經驗。所以話要學習呢，我哋要做好啲
，做得比泛民，做得比保皇做得更加好。希望大家黎緊欣賞依段片，細心去聽。

So, our video should be ready by now, though you can’t see the screen. I’m
sorry about that, we’ll do better in the future, because we really don’t have
any experience. That’s why we have to learn, we have to do better, to do better
than the pan-democrats and the pro-establishment. I hope you will enjoy this
video, and listen to it carefully.

[ The English translation is released under Creative Commons, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 ]
