【八月五日　港獨集會　陳浩天發言 #2】 (Chan Ho-tin's Speech #2 in the Hong Kong
Independence Rally on Aug 5)


抄本：Dolphin
英譯：Marco, Sidney

陳浩天：
唉～又係我啊！我知大家唔係好想見到我……
頭先終於有畫面咖啦，都有音樂嘅，但係把人聲就唔知去咗邊，可能佢休息咗訓咗覺，我唔
知道。咁…
但我未休息我仲喺度。咁其實講返今次選委會（選管會）嘅事啦，我都唔記得咗講添頭先，
點解今次咁多人呢，好有可能係，唔單只我嘅被選權係被剝奪咗，係大家嘅選舉權都被剝奪
咗，因為可能你地係好想投票畀香港獨立嘅人，想投票畀民族黨，或者係陳浩天，或者係梁
天琦、陳國強……er，等等啦，或者中出羊子同埋賴綺雯。但係，你地冇得投票啊，突然之間
，你地個心水，你地個對象係畀人唔知點解delete咗，就冇咗啦。呢個明明係我地嘅權利嚟
咖嘛，我地係可以去畀人選咖嘛，你係去可以選你地畀人選，即你地想選嘅人咖嘛，但呢啲
全部都冇晒。


Chan Ho-tin:
Right, it is me again! I know everyone don’t fancy seeing me.... Picture is up,
so is the background music, but audio is gone, maybe it is taking a break and
has fallen asleep, I have no idea. However, I am still here, taking no breaks.
Let’s go back to the Election Committee (Electoral Affairs Commission) debacle,
which I had forgotten to mention in the first place. Why are so many gathering
in here? It is very likely because not only I was deprived of the right to
stand for election, but also your right to vote as well, because you wanted to
vote for those who fight for Hong Kong’s Independence, may it be the Hong Kong
National Party, or Chan Ho-tin, or Leung Tin-kei, Chan Kwok-keung...er,
etcetera, or Nakade Hitsujiko or Alice Lai. However, you cannot cast your vote,
as all of a sudden, your favourite candidate was deleted and disappeared. They
were our rights: we can stand for election, you can vote for those you want to
vote for, but all that is gone now.

今次佢可以話因為我地講香港獨立，所以唔畀我地去選，但下一次呢？下一次唔知咖喎，我
都講過好多次啦，下一次可以問：「你支唔支持共產黨啊？」我想問你一個問題：『你認為
你對於呢個基本法或者共產黨嘅認識唔係太深，我覺得呢，即係個選舉主任咁講，我覺得你
係需要回答我呢個問題，然後根據你呢個問題嘅答案呢我會作出一個決定，我會判斷你嘅選
舉資格有效定係無效。』」之後又可能會再問：「你點樣睇梁振英啊？你點睇呢個特區政府
嘅施政啊？你覺得好唔好呢下？」
咁如果你話唔好嘅時候，咁就大獲啦，因為呢我覺得你就唔係真心去效忠呢個香港特別行政
區，所以我唔會畀你去參選。

This time they accuse us of calling for the independence of Hong Kong and
banned us from running, but what about next time? No one knows what will happen
next time. I have reiterated this many times, next time they can ask whether
you support the Chinese Communist Party. I want to ask you a question: ‘Do you
consider you have a thorough understanding of the Basic Law or the Chinese
Communist Party? I think, as a returning officer, you are required to answer my
question, and I will make a decision according to your answer, I will decide
whether you are eligible to run for election.’ Then they may ask another
question: ’What’s your opinion on CY Leung? What’s your opinion on the current
SAR government? Do you think it is good?’ If you provide a negative answer,
then you are in deep trouble, as I don’t think you will wholeheartedly pledge
allegiance to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, I will not allow you
to run for election.

呢個立法會本來就已經係殘缺，本來就係一個唔公平嘅制度，有一半嘅直選咋喎，有一半大
家唔能夠去選，唔能夠去提名，唔能夠去投票，唔關你事咖嗰三十五席。淨返嗰三十五席本
來都算係民主嘅一個機制丫，但連最後嘅民主機制都冇埋。

This legislative council is already crippled, it has a system that is
fundamentally unfair. Half of the members are returned by direct elections,
but, for the other half, you cannot run for those seats, you cannot nominate,
you cannot vote. Those 35 seats are none of your business. Originally, the
other 35 seats used to represent some kind of democratic mechanism, but even
this democratic mechanism is now gone.

我以前都係一隻港豬，大家都成日鬧人地係一隻港豬或者畀人鬧港豬，唔知點解。我都係港
豬，然後變成黃絲，九二八催淚彈我都出咗嚟，嗰陣時我諗，呀我地都係爭取呢個民主，爭
取呢個真普選嘅啫，我都係咁樣諗咖咋。咁都有啲人話要燒咗枝中國旗，下點解要咁樣做呢
？我唔明喎。咩事啫？我地要爭取自己嘅民主咋嘛，我去爭取真普選咋喎，關中國咩事啊？
你地咁樣做唔係好啱囉咁樣。又有人話要講香港獨立，我就話：嘩你痴線啦，你講埋啲咁嘅
嘢，大逆不道！

I used to be a little piglet (literally: “Kong Pigs”, some mythical creature
who purports to be political adverse) too, we are always too eager to call
people out for being a piglet, or too easy to be called out for being a piglet,
I don’t know why. I was also a piglet, and then I became a yellow ribbon. I was
there on 28th of September during the tear gas incident. I was thinking to
myself, ah, we are all fighting for democracy, for “real” universal suffrage,
that was all I was thinking about. Occasionally there were those that wanted to
burn a Chinese flag. I thought to myself: why would they do that? I didn’t
understand. How is it relevant? We are fighting only for our own democracy, I
am fighting only for real universal suffrage, what did it have to do with
China? I honestly think you have made a big mistake. Then, somebody called for
the Independence of Hong Kong. I would tell them: Wow you are insane, these
words are utter blasphemy!

但，慢慢我發覺呢，我不斷係每一晚去街頭度訓，然後去……即係示威定點樣都好，寫「我要
真普選」Banner，旺角最大嗰條係我寫嘅。即係我都係轉過頭像係黃絲帶嘅，我都做過呢啲
嘢。但慢慢我發覺呢，原來我地爭取緊嘅對象呢，唔係呢個香港政府，原來呢個香港政府只
係一個傀儡政府，只係一個殖民政府，佢受呢個共產黨嘅操控咖咋，即係扯線公仔嚟咖咋。
你真正嘅對象，你要攞民主，你係要問呢個共產黨，你要問呢個中華人民共和國嘅政府去攞
。咁我就諗啦：你唔畀我啊？咁我咪同你切割囉！好簡單咋嘛。咁我切割咗，我同你共產黨
切割咗，同中國切割咗，咁我咪有民主囉，就係咁簡單！


However, gradually I discovered, that every night I was sleeping on the
streets, and then… no matter how much we protested, no matter how many ‘I want
real universal suffrage’ banners we wrote -- I wrote the largest one in
Mongkok. Even if I changed my profile picture into a yellow ribbon, I have done
all those things, but gradually I discovered, that the one we are fighting
against is not this government of Hong Kong. It turns out that this government
is merely a puppet, a colonial administration that is controlled by the Chinese
Communist Party. It’s just a puppet on a string. Your real target, if you want
democracy, should be the Communist Party, you should ask the government of the
People's Republic of China. Then I thought, are you going to give me that? If
not, I will just separate myself from you! It is very simple, after the
separation, after my cutting away from your Communist Party, after cutting away
from China, then we will have democracy, it is that simple!

所以，我見到希望，我見到方向：香港獨立。我就選擇咗佢，就行呢條路。咁，希望大家明
白啦，大家都係咁樣行過嚟，將來遇到有身邊唔明白嘅人，試下從呢啲方向同大家講，去話
畀佢聽，其實你冇得選擇咖，香港獨立係唯一嘅選擇。你唔信香港獨立能夠成功呢，都唔輪
到你唔信。唔係你信唔信嘅問題，唔係你覺得可唔可能嘅問題，而係，你冇得選擇，你唯有
選擇香港獨立，你唔香港獨立咩？一國一制囉，一係一國兩制囉，都冇樣係好咖啦，總之有
國有制就唔好咖啦。

Thus, I see hope, I see direction: Independence of Hong Kong. I chose this, and
I will walk this path. I hope you all will understand, we all walk the same
path, and if you run into someone who does not understand it, you can explain
it to him like how I did. Tell him that there is no other choice, that
independence is the only way to go. It is not up to you to doubt whether it
will succeed. It is not a question of whether you have faith or whether you
think it is possible, but that, you have no other choice, you can only go for
the independence of Hong Kong. You say you don’t want independence? Then you’re
left with total reunification with China, or “One Country Two Systems”. Neither
of them will do any good, anything with ‘country’ or ‘system’ will not do any
good anyway.

香港獨立係唯一嘅出路，你冇得揀，即使係難行都好，你亦都要行。咁，我講住係咁多先，
交返畀司儀先，Vickie。

Independence is the only way out for Hong Kong. You have no choice. This may be
a tortuous path, but you still have to walk it. Ok, that is all for now. Back
to our master of ceremony, Vickie.

[ The English translation is released under Creative Commons, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 ]
