【八月五日　港獨集會　梁天琦發言】 (Edward Leung's Speech in the Hong Kong
Independence Rally on Aug 5)

抄本：Shiori （標點：Sidney）
英譯：Jeromy, Timothy, Judy, Sidney, etc.

喂喂喂喂喂喂喂？大家好，我係本土民主前線嘅發⋯ 喂，大家好 我係⋯
喂喂喂？係呀，係咁架，一波三折呀，做人真係⋯⋯
喂喂喂喂，大家好。咁多位香港人你地好。我係本土民主前線嘅發言人。我叫做梁天琦。好
高興咁多位今日都會嚟出席呢個「和理非非」嘅集會啦。
(Microphone not working…) Life is full of twists and turns. I am the
spokesperson of Hong Kong Indigenous. My name is Edward Leung. I am very glad
to see you all in this rally, one that is described as a peaceful, rational,
violence-free, profanity-free occasion.

咁，咁就好多人就會奇怪，點解香港民族黨或者本土派，會搞一個咁嘅集會。即係，過往我
哋我地成日強調話我哋要勇武抗爭，我哋唾棄形式主義，唾棄失敗主義。咁係咪代表我地一
定唔可以喊口號、唔可以搞遊行、唔可以搞集會、唔可以聽歌呢？其實一直都唔係。我地過
往喺金鐘呢個地方，喺旺角，當我哋係喺雨傘革命走上前線嘅時候，點解我哋唾棄舊有模式
，點解我哋唾棄舊有政客呢？就係因為佢地教條主義。和平、理性、非暴力、有啲人仲覺得
應該非粗口添吖。佢地覺得呢啲嘢係天條，一定唔可以違背。結果當喺金鐘呢個地方，有義
士衝出龍和道嘅時候，結果就俾一班教條主義嘅示威者拋棄。我哋反對嘅係呢一樣。我哋係
反對嘅係教條主義，而唔係和平集會，或者公民抗命本身嘅能力。依一樣嘢，係喺新東補選
嘅時候已經講過一次。我地依一個社會，如果要攞返番我哋應該有嘅權力，我哋唔可以再繼
續教條主義。條條大路通羅馬，邊一個方式可以推翻呢個政府嘅，呢一個方式就應該去做。
相信和平抗爭嘅人，相信公民抗命嘅人，繼續公民抗命；相信佔馬路、相信絕食、相信罷交
稅等等唔同和平手段嘅人，繼續去做。我鼓勵你地去做，我希望你地去做。我唔希望你地因
為有人批評你地嘅手段，結果就完全放棄你地相信嘅嘢。同時間，相信勇武抗爭嘅人，一樣
都要繼續做。

A lot of people may wonder, why the Hong Kong National Party or localists would
hold such a rally. We have always stressed valiant defiance, we refute
ritualism and defeatism. But does that mean we cannot shout slogans, hold
rallies, or listen to music? Never so. We were in Admiralty, we were in Mong
Kok, the battlefront of the Umbrella Revolution. Why did we refute the old ways
and the established politicians? Because of their dogmatism. They think that
being “peaceful, rational and non-violent”, some may also include
“profanity-free”, are commandments that must not be violated. So, when
protesters rushed out to occupy Lung Wo Road in Admiralty, they were abandoned
by these dogmatist protesters. We oppose such dogmatism, but not peaceful
assemblies. We do not deny what civil disobedience can achieve. I mentioned
this back in the New Territories East by-election. We, as a society, need to
reclaim our rights. We need to abandon dogmatism. All roads lead to Rome; we
should consider each and every means to overthrow the regime. If you believe in
peaceful struggle or civil disobedience, continue doing that. If you think
occupying roads, hunger strikes, and refusing to pay taxes will work, please,
by all means, continue. I encourage you to do it. I urge you to do it. I do not
want to see you abandon your beliefs because somebody criticized your means. At
the same time, for those who believe in valiant defiance, please continue to do
that.


近呢幾個月，我哋曾經發起過示威。就係七一嘅一個示威，喺中聯辦外面，我哋失敗咗。我
地連累到有好幾位義士，出到嚟諗住支持我地，但結果被捕。乜嘢都做唔到。Plan A
做唔成，Plan B做唔成，Plan C
都做唔成。證明咗啲乜嘢嘢吖？我地反抗政府，攞返我哋應有權力嘅時候，我哋要因時制宜
。當晚，有近千個警察守係喺西環。如果我地盲目相信勇武抗爭係一定會成功，只有勇武抗
爭先係一定要行嘅路的話，我地當晚就會一齊去送死。我唔想見到有人犧牲，亦都唔想見到
有人係被推上前線。只係一個必須嘅情況底下，只係一個兩難嘅局面，一係就留低，一係就
企係度抵抗嘅時候，我地先要孤注一擲，勇武抗爭。

In recent months, we called for a demonstration on July 1st outside the CCP
Liaison Office, but we failed. Several citizens who came to support us were
even arrested. Plan A failed. Plan B failed. Even Plan C failed. What does all
this prove? When we oppose the government, to reclaim our right, we have to act
according to the situation. There were almost a thousand police officers in Sai
Wan. If we blindly believe in valiant defiance as the only way to success, we
will get arrested for nothing. I don’t want unnecessary sacrifice, and I don’t
want to see people getting pushed onto the frontline. Only if we have to, in an
either-stay-or-go dilemma, we will risk everything to go for valiant defiance.


我希望大家會明白依一點，唔好再繼續教條主義，唔好再盲目相信自己嗰一條道路係一定會
成功，係必須要行嘅道路，而其他所有嘅路，都係唔應該行，係錯嘅。我地絕對要因時制宜
。所以我覺得，今日民族黨搞依個集會呢，係非常之好嘅一件事。因為我相信⋯⋯而家依四隻
字我唔講得吖依家，因為要打官司要選舉呈請吖，所以就唔講得呀。好鬼辛苦，真係好辛苦
。依四隻字呢，依四隻字係第一次係添馬公園依一度出現，然之後有咁多香港人走出嚟，就
係為咗依四隻大字。依一個係一個歷史性嘅時刻，所以我唔會叫你地俾聲、俾啲掌聲自己嘅
，絕對唔會叫。但係，要記住依一刻，依刻係我地彰顯獨立意志嘅一刻。
We hope everyone will understand this: no more dogmatism, and don’t believe you
hold the only true path to success. Don’t brush aside all the other ways, don’t
think they are wrong. We have to act according to the situation. So, the
National Party organized this rally today, and I think it’s great, because I
believe in these four characters (pointing to the “Hong Kong independence”
backdrop) - which I cannot mention due to the upcoming election petition. I
can’t say these words, and I am in agony, in total agony. This is the first
time these four characters have appeared in Tamar Park. And so many Hong Kong
people showed up here, because of these four big characters. What a historical
moment. I won’t ask you to “give yourself a round of applause”, absolutely not.
But do remember this moment, because this is the moment we flaunt our
independent spirit.


好，跟住就係入正題。咁今日呢，咁其實我思緒就好混亂嘅。依段時間，因為發生得太多事
喇呢兩個禮拜。即係其實我乜嘢選舉，我根本都未開始準備，我仲返緊學。咁結果呢，依啲
政治嘅漩渦，政治嘅風波就係咁拑(cum)埋嚟，要不斷去面對。所以到而家依個依一刻呢，
我個頭腦非常混亂。到底要講啲乜嘢，先最能夠鼓動大家獨立嘅意志？到底要講啲乜嘢，先
最能夠令更加多人醒覺，走出嚟反抗，都仲未諗好。咁但有幾個我係主題想講嘅，咁就寫咗
係手板。

Let’s get to the point. My head is in total chaos these days, as so many things
have happened these two weeks. I prepared for nothing. I am still in
university, and the political tempest just stormed in. I have to face it. At
this very moment my mind is still very confused. What I should say to enkindle
your will for independence? What should I say to wake up more people to resist
suppression? I still have no idea. But there are a few themes I would like to
address, which I have written on my hand.


第一樣嘢呢，係政治。乜嘢係政治呢？有人話係眾人之事，而我睇呢，政治嘅本質，其實就
係權力嘅分配。當我地講一個政治問題出現嘅時候，其實就係講緊依個社會上嘅權力、資源
，到底係俾中央繼續集權吖，或者係俾社會上嘅權貴，繼續保持佢地嘅權力，抑或呢啲權力
轉移到另一個持份者，例如人民，例如香港人。咁依兩個禮拜發生嘅事係啲乜嘢嘢呢？就係
政府將佢地本身法例上冇嘅權力延伸
無限延伸，白紙黑字寫明嘅法律，政府唔跟。政府延伸佢地嘅權力，剝奪人民本身應該有嘅
選舉權、被選舉權以及言論自由。所以依個係一個權力分配嘅問題。當我地依班香港人走出
嚟反抗，追求一個政體嘅改革，或者好似今時今日咁樣，追求依四隻大字，我地講緊嘅就係
我地要奪權，我地要攞番依個社會上我地應有嘅權利。依一個社會、依一個香港嘅主權，唔
係屬於習近平，唔係屬於中央，唔係屬於共產黨，唔係屬於中國政府，亦唔係屬於特區政府
。依一個社會嘅主權係屬於香港人。主權永遠都應該在民，唔應該在於北京。

The first keyword is politics. What is politics? Some say it is everybody’s
business. Yet I would regard the distribution of power as the essence of the
politics. When we start to grumble about a political problem, we are actually
asking whether the powers and resources of the society should remain in the
hands of a centralized regime or the aristocrats and bigwigs, or should these
powers be transferred to other stakeholders, like the people, the people of
Hong Kong. What we saw in these two weeks, is the government assumed powers
that they did not legally have, and extended them, indefinitely. The government
simply did not follow the black-and-white laws. They extended their power, they
deprived our rights to elect and to be elected, and our freedom of speech. It
is an issue of distribution of power. When we, the people of Hong Kong, come
out to resist oppression, when we pursue political reform, or, like today, when
we pursue these four big characters here -- we are saying that we must “seize
power”. We must claim the rights that we should have. The sovereignty of this
Hong Kong does not belong to Xi Jinping, nor the Central (Government), nor the
Communist Party, nor the Chinese Government, nor the SAR Government. It belongs
to the people of Hong Kong. The sovereignty shall always rest in the people,
not the hands of Peking.


但香港嘅情況係點樣？香港百多萬嘅香港人，有血有肉嘅香港人，一百幾十萬。佢地冇選出
一個代表佢地代議士嘅權力。佢地冇被選舉權，佢地冇言論自由，佢地嘅權利完全俾政府剝
削。呢一個係乜嘢社會呀？係一個獨裁社會。有獨立意志嘅人，追求意志嘅人，面對一個獨
裁政府，應該點樣？革命。但係問題就嚟喇，革命會流血嗰喎、革命會失敗嗰喎、革命有犧
牲嗰喎。當然會出現啦。如果依個政府唔令你革命失敗，唔打壓你嘅革命，唔令你有犧牲，
唔剝削你權力，唔扼殺你地係萌芽之中⋯⋯代表啲乜嘢？代表你地嘅革命冇效吖。你對政府冇
威脅吖。咁所以今時今日依個局面，好似好差。但同時間亦都反證一樣嘢，就係我地對香港
政府以及北京政府、中國，我地對佢地構成威脅。所以大家係應該為依件事出現而鼓舞。我
地丟掉左對香港政府、對特區政府、對基本法、對一國兩制嘅幻想。我地今時今日呢刻開始
，我地準備鬥爭，我地準備奪權。依一個就係今日集會嘅意義。

What is the situation of Hong Kong now? More than a million Hong Kong people,
with flesh and blood, who are unable elect their own representatives. No right
to be elected. No freedom of speech. Their rights are totally deprived by the
government. What society is this? This is a dictatorship. What should those
with an independent spirit do in the face of a dictatorship? Revolution! But
the problem is, revolution leads bloodshed. It might fail, and there would be
sacrifices. For sure these will happen. If this government does not frustrate
your attempt at revolution, does not suppress your revolution, does not make
you sacrifice, does not strip you of your power, nor does it kill your plot at
the initial stage, what does that mean? That means your revolution is not
effective, and you pose no threat to the government. Therefore, although the
situation might seem bad today, it also shows that we are a threat to the Hong
Kong and Peking governments. We should be heartened by these turn of events.
Let us throw away our fantasies about the Hong Kong SAR Government, the Basic
Law or One Country Two Systems. From now on, from this moment, we should
prepare to fight and prepare to seize power. This is what today’s rally is
about.


跟住另一樣嘢：政府。乜嘢係政府？政府點解會出現？政府係因為人民希望有一個權力分配
嘅機構，去會維持社會嘅秩序，先至會出現。政府唔係一個管治人民嘅機構，政府應該係人
民嘅僕人。人民唔應該害怕政府，政府應該害怕人民。相信大家有睇戲嘅，應該知道依兩句
說話，係香港一樣適用。雖然今時今刻，仍然有好多香港人係害怕呢個政府。點解？政府有
武力，政府有權力，政府掌握哂社會上嘅話語權。政府有法律，佢可以隨意解釋法律。袁國
強講嘅法律就係法律。依個就係香港。政府嘅本質就係一個暴力嘅機構，當我地做嘅事，唔
符合政府所諗，唔符合政府當權者嘅方向，佢就會用暴力嚟打壓我地。所以點解我地要強調
勇武抗爭，就係因為政府本身已經係一個暴力嘅機構。對住一個暴力機構，我地唔可以仁慈
，唔可以懦弱，亦都唔可以再同佢講乜嘢仁義道德。依一個政府，根本就係一個無賴嘅政府
。無賴嘅政權。中國就係一個無賴嘅國家。你同佢講仁義道德做乜鬼嘢呢？佢要做無賴嘅……
當然有好多人唔想做無賴啦，包括我自己。但係如果依一個係必要嘅方法，去推翻依個政府
嘅話，我願意做依個無賴。

Another keyword: government. What is a government, and why is there government?
A government only appears when the people want an institution to distribute
power, and to maintain the order of the society. A government is not an
organization for ruling the people, a govern should be a servant to the people.
People shouldn't be afraid of their government. The government should be afraid
of its people. You may have known these words from the movie. You should know
they are applicable to Hong Kong. But right now, at this moment, a lot of Hong
Kong people are still afraid of the government. Why? The government has
physical force and power. It has a firm grip of the power of discourse. It
controls the law, and interprets it arbitrarily. What Rimsky Yuen (Secretary
for Justice) says is law, is law. This is Hong Kong, its government essentially
an institution of violence. When we do something against those in power, they
use violence to suppress us. That is why we stress ”valiant defiance”,
precisely because the regime itself is an institution of violence. To fight
against a violent organization, we cannot be kind, we cannot be wimpish, and we
cannot afford them any kindness or fairness. This government is essentially a
rogue regime, and China is a rogue state. Why the heck do you want to discuss
morality and kindness with them? They are to behave like a thug. Many people
don’t want to be a thug, including myself. But if this is a necessary means to
overthrow this government, I am willing to do it.

跟住落嚟第三樣：
革命。乜嘢係革命？大家一定即刻聯想到流血革命。辛亥革命、死人、冧樓、犧牲、打壓、
監獄……大家一定聯想起依一切一切。但其實革命本身係一樣乜嘢事呢？革命本身就係講緊一
個社會結構，權力分配，一個根本性改變，一個從下而上嘅改變。一個從上而下嘅改變，其
實係代表一個改革；而一個從下而上嘅改變就係革命。咁大家諗吓，今時今日你地，仲會唔
會奢求中國、香港特區政府從上而下改革？仲會唔會相信佢地俾我地有民主？俾我地有自由
？冇可能。所以話我地必須要革命。而革命幾時開始？革命其實已經開始。兩年前點解我地
依班本土派，叫「雨傘運動」叫做「雨傘革命」？就係因為我地知道，嗰一刻就係一個開始
。嗰一刻更多香港人知道，我地唔可以再靠其他人，我唔可以再靠個政府網開一面。因為如
果你依靠佢網開一面，先至俾我地有民主嘅話，呢一種只不過係一種人治。點解我地要當權
者網開一面呢？點解我地要北京政府有一絲善念，知道香港人其實唔係諗住顛覆國家架⋯⋯只
不過想要權利咋嘛，只不過想要民主咋嘛，而開啟個民主改革呢？我地就係唔相信依一樣嘢
，我地先至會走出嚟。從下而上向政府施壓。我地唔希望香港係一個人治嘅社會，我地希望
香港係一個法治嘅社會。憲法寫到明我地應有嘅權利，我地就應該要有。所以兩年前依一個
革命已經開始左，只不過大家唔知道。只不過大家仍然覺得：「唔係吖！好和平，好理性，
好非暴力」，「非常之美好嘅一個烏托邦，好似金鐘嘅嗰一條馬路：夏愨道咁樣」。但其實
革命已經悄悄開始左。因為我地唔再奢求當權者從上而下改革，我地係由下而上扭轉依個社
會嘅權力結構。

The third keyword, revolution. What is revolution? Coming to your minds must be
bloody revolutions, the 1911 Xinhai Revolution, death, destruction, sacrifice,
suppression, imprisonment... All of these will come to your mind. But what is
the essence of revolution? Revolution is a fundamental change of the social
structure, and the distribution of power, a change in a bottom-up manner. A
top-down change is a reform, but a bottom-up change is a revolution. Think
about it. Today, at this moment, would you still fancy for a top-down reform by
the Chinese and Hong Kong SAR government? Do you still believe they will give
us democracy? Do you still believe they will give us freedom? Impossible.
That’s why we say that we have to revolt. When to start the revolution? It has
already started. Two years ago, why did we localists, call the “Umbrella
Movement” the “Umbrella Revolution”? Because we all knew that it was a new
start. From that moment, more and more Hongkongers became aware that we cannot
rely on others, or seek mercy from the government. If you counted on their
mercy to achieve democracy, that is just another kind of dictatorship. Why do
we need mercy from the rulers? Why do we fancy for a sliver of good faith from
Peking, to let them know that Hongkongers are not subversive, but simply want
rights and democracy, and hope that they will initiate democratic reform? We
simply don’t believe this. That’s why we showed up on 26 September, 28
September or 30 November, to pressure the government from the bottom up. We
don’t want Hong Kong to be under the rule of man, we want a society with rule
of law. We deserve to enjoy the constitutional rights we are entitled to, the
rights that are clearly written in our laws. So this revolution already started
two years ago. You were just unaware of it, as you still thought it was a
peaceful, rational, non-violent utopia, like that road in Admiralty - Harcourt
Road. The revolution has already started quietly, as we no longer request for
top-down reform by those in power. We are, from the bottom, making changes to
the power structure of this society.


革命已經開始，咁到底幾時會成功？1894
年，孫中山係做緊啲乜嘢野呢？佢仲係度向李鴻章上一本書，叫做萬言書。仲講緊一個滿清
政府應該點樣改革。咁相信大家都知道，佢喺1895年，冇人理佢之後，成立左興中會，開始
正式嘅革命。幾時先至成功？1911
年。由佢開始走上革命嘅呢條路，用左16年先至推翻到一個滿清政府。我唔想掃大家興，唔
想潑大家冷水，但係革命係一條長嘅路，冇可能一時三刻就成功。但係又有可能突然之間一
時三刻就會成功。係一樣好弔詭，好好笑嘅一件事，革命。但係我地要保持依一個革命嘅精
神，我地要影響更加多嘅人。因為當成功嘅嗰一刻，我地回望番過去，就知道一切都係值得
。

The revolution has started, but when will it succeed? What was Dr Sun Yat-sen
doing in 1894? He was writing a “ten-thousand-word” petition to Li Hung-chang
(a top mandarin in Peking), explaining how the Manchurian government should
carry out reforms. As we all know, in 1895, one year after he was ignored, he
established the Revive China Society and started the revolution. When did Sun’s
revolution succeed? 1911. From the moment he started it, he spent 16 years
trying to overthrow the Manchurian government. I don’t want to disappoint you,
but revolution is a long and tortuous path. It is impossible to succeed
immediately, but then it is also possible to succeed all of a sudden.
Revolution is an intriguing and interesting thing. But we need to keep up the
revolutionary spirit and influence more people. Because at the moment we
succeed, we will look back and know that everything is worth it.


如果革命成功之後，我地攞唔到人民嘅心、民心，我地冇辦法得依個天下。「得民心者得天
下」。所以我地最先要做嘅嘢係影響更加多嘅人。今時今日，有17 %
百多萬嘅香港人相信依四隻大字。我地要繼續將依個數字繼續上升，我唔知道幾時我地先至
會成為社會上嘅大多數，但我知道終有一日，我地係社會上嘅主流。依一樣係必然會發生嘅
事，因為即使今時今日，我冇得參選，即使今時今日我冇得再從政，我相信依個「門常開」
一日係依度，我都冇機會走入隔籬嘅依一幢大樓。但係唔緊要，因為仍然有第二個取代我，
後繼絕對一定會有人。你地絕對唔應該將所有嘅希望，擺係一個人嘅身上。一個人佢代表嘅
當然代表佢自己啦，但同時間佢代表嘅只不過係一個理念。你地追隨嘅應該係一個理念，唔
係一個人。即使我冇辦法參選，冇辦法再……我唔知仲可以做啲乜嘢，到今時今刻，但係我知
道，我仍然可以繼續影響更加多嘅人。我仍然可以繼續宣揚我嘅理念，我地要繼續影響依個
民心。我地終有一日會成為主流，終有一日會成功。

If the revolution is successful, but without the heart of the people, there is
no way we can win the land. If we want to succeed, we have to win the hearts of
the people. “The One Who Wins the Hearts of the People Win the World”.
Therefore the first thing we should do is to influence more people. Today, 17%
of Hong Kong People, that is, more than a million of them, believe in these
four big characters (Hong Kong Independence). We have to keep pumping up the
numbers. I don’t know when we will become the majority in the society. But I
know that day will come. We will become the mainstream in the society. It is
inevitable. Today I am barred from the election, and can pursue no political
career. I even think that as long as this government building is here, I will
have no chance to get into the Legislative Council building next door. But it
matters not. Somebody will replace me, somebody will definitely succeed me. You
should not place all your hopes on one single person. A person surely
represents himself, but sometimes he represents only an idea. We shall follow
an idea, not a person. Although I am denied candidacy, I have no way……… I have
no idea what I can do. But I know, I can still influence more people, and I can
still spread my ideas. We should continue influencing the hearts of the people.
One day we will go mainstream, and we will succeed.


到最後：夢想。乜嘢係夢想呢？夢想係……夢想就係夢想囉。咁夢想其實係好虛幻一件事。夢
想係實現之前呢，永遠都好似痴人說夢話咁樣。我喺 18 歲嘅時候，就係呢個⋯⋯ 17呀
17歲嘅時候，咁有好多記者係度啦，咁我唔講啲咩政黨或者議員嘅名。但係當時
08年，大家都知道有邊一個新政團走入立法會。大家都應該知道，當時有邊一個領頭人物，
係依一個政黨嘅代表。佢地喺議會做嘅所有嘢，影響到我。我中六嘅時候就同我一個同學講
：
「我將來想成為一個代議士，你覺得點睇？」佢就話：「幾好吖！你都幾啱做吖。你一定會
成功架，我將來會投票俾你。」咁但係，依一樣野今時今日好似失敗左吖。但係曾經，我距
離依一個夢想，只有一步之遙。而係我追求依個夢想嘅依半年，發生左啲乜嘢事？依一年，
其實一年前，我只不過係一個廢青。一年前我只不過係畢業唔到嘅大學生，好想畢業，畢業
唔到。一年前我只不過係一個社會上完全冇人知我係乜嘢人，我亦都唔知道，我係社會上應
擔當乜嘢角色嘅一個廢青。有邊一個人會諗到，一年之後，依一個廢青會成為一個被政府剝
削政治權利嘅香港人。有邊一個人會諗到，一年之後，依一個廢青係曾經距離依一個夢想，
只有一步之遙？冇人會諗到，我自己都唔係真係好相信。但係即使我自己對我嘅夢想能唔能
實現，只不過係半信半疑，但係我知道，如果我真係繼續半信半疑，而唔去做嘅話，我一定
會失敗。如果我係秉持住依一個夢想，即使知道好難成功，即使知道好大機會失敗，即使知
道我走出嚟會俾人恥笑，會俾人唾棄，會俾人謾罵，會俾人打壓，但我都依然繼續去做。「
人冇夢想同鹹魚有咩分別吖？」係咪？咁所以我繼續去做，咁所以一年之後嘅今時今日，你
見到我梁天琦企左係依一度。但係其實一年之前，我只不過係一個廢青，搵唔到工，乜嘢都
做唔到，乜嘢都唔識。

Finally: dream. What is a dream? Well, a dream is… a dream. A dream is actually
an illusory and vague thing. Before it becomes reality, it sounds like some
crazy nonsense. When I was 18, it was this... when I was 17….. There are a lot
of reporters here, so I’d better not mention the name of the party or the
politician. We all know that in 2008, a new political group got into the
Legislative Council. You may already know the leader who represents the party.
Everything they did in the legislature influenced me. When I was in Form 6, I
told a classmate that I wanted to become a legislator. I asked what he thought.
He replied, “Very good! You are fit for it. You will succeed, and I will vote
for you.” Today It seems that I have failed. But at some point in time, I was
just one step away from this dream. What has happened during this dream-chasing
year? One year ago, I was just one of those “Rubbish Youths”, still wondering
if I could graduate. One year ago, nobody knew me, and I didn’t know what role
I should take up in society as a young loser. Who could have imagined, one year
later, this rubbish youth would become a politically-oppressed Hong Konger? Who
could have imagined, one year later, a young loser could come so close to
realizing his dream? Nobody thought it was possible. Even I myself could not
believe it. I doubted whether I could realize my dreams. Yet I knew if I kept
hesitating and refuse to do anything, I am destined to fail. If I persevere in
pursuing my dreams, notwithstanding hardships and huge risks of failure, even
if I know I will be mocked, abandoned, railed or suppressed, I will keep
pursuing them. “How different are we from salted fish, if we had no dreams?”
That’s why I kept pursuing my dreams, and one year later, I stand here as the
Edward Leung you know. But one year ago, I was a young loser who couldn’t find
a job, who did nothing, who knew nothing.

所以今時今日大家有依一個理想，有依一個夢想，大家要繼續保持依個夢想，終有一日我地
會成功。同因為依一刻好多人會恥笑我地，覺得我地係痴線，但係一年前又有邊一個人會諗
到，依四隻大字會影響到咁多香港人，會走嚟依個地方集會吖？一年前你講呢四隻大字，會
俾人以為
會俾人話痴線架。打機可能得吖，唔好發夢啦。但一年之後有呢個集會出現，咁再一年後會
有啲乜嘢事出現呀？我唔知。但如果我地依一班人，以及社會上好多未嚟嘅人，繼續保持依
一個夢想嘅話，我地一定可以實現依個夢想，一定會成功。係呢一刻，非常之黑暗吖。陳浩
天所講。咁但係我相信大家，有好多人都有睇過蝙蝠俠吖。咁蝙蝠俠裡面有一句對白就係話
：「黎明之前嘅黑暗，係至撚黑暗嘅」。真係好黑暗，但係黎明即將會來臨。多謝大家。

So today we have this dream (patting the backdrop with the words “Hong Kong
Independence”). We should keep this dream, and one day we shall succeed. People
may laugh at us today, and think we are crazy. But one year ago, who could have
imagined the influence of these words on so many Hongkongers, such that we all
joined this rally? One year ago if you said this (Hong Kong Independence),
people would say that you’re nuts. People would tell you to stop fantasizing,
and that it could only be possible in video games. But one year later, we
witness this rally. What will happen after another year then? I don’t know. But
if we, and many others in the society who are not yet with us now, keep this
dream, we will definitely be able to realise this dream. We will succeed. It is
a very dark moment. Yet I believe you have all seen Batman. There is a line
from the movie - the night is darkest just before the dawn. It’s very dark now,
but dawn is coming soon. Thank you all.


光復香港！時代革命！
光復香港！時代革命！
光復香港！時代革命！

Reclaim Hong Kong! It’s time for revolution!
Reclaim Hong Kong! It’s time for revolution!
Reclaim Hong Kong! It’s time for revolution!

多謝大家。
Thank you all.

[ The English translation is released under Creative Commons, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 ]
