【八月五日　港獨集會　陳國強發言】 (James Chan Kwok-keung's Speech in the Hong
Kong Independence Rally on Aug 5)

抄本：Nick
英譯：Nick

陳國強：
各位，大家好。喺今年年初，我識咗阿陳浩天。噉佢同我講，佢會搞一個香港民族黨。三月
二十八日就會有一個記者招待會，就會宣佈成立香港民族黨。佢同我講，強哥，你嚟唔嚟？
我話，我驚你呀？佢話，你區議員嚟㗎喎。我［se］都未［se］過。卒之去到呢，我發覺呢
，我係唯一一個區議員，係在場嘅。噉隔籬有啲人同我講，佢話強哥，你行開少少吖，真係
驚影響你。我哋講緊——由細到大，都係講緊言論自由、行動自由、思想自由，如果我做咗一
個爛鬼區議員，我唔敢同我朋友有不同政治理念，進步理念都唔敢坐埋一齊嘅，嗰個絕對唔
係陳國強。（歡呼）

James Chan Kwok-keung:
Good evening, everyone. At the beginning of this year, I met Chan Ho-tin. He
told me he was going to setting up the Hong Kong National Party; the press
conference would be held on 28 March. He said, “James, are you coming?” And I
was like, sure! Why the hell not? And he said, you’re a district councillor
after all, you know. But I ain’t scared of nothin’. And so I went to the press
conference. I was the only district councillor who showed up. Some people told
me, ‘Hey, James, don’t stand so close to us. We might affect your reputation.’
Now, we’ve believed—ever since we were little kids, we’ve believed in freedom
of speech, freedom of movement, and freedom of thought. Now that I’ve become a
freaking district councillor, if I don’t even dare to disagree with my friends
on political ideals, if I don’t even dare to sit next to comrades who share the
same progressive political ideals, that is not Chan Kwok-keung! [the crowd
cheers]

香港獨立，其實我從來都未講過呢四個字嘅，不過我今日真係要講。我一直都係講緊抗共反
赤，我一直都係講緊全世界包括埋大陸、香港、歐洲、東南亞，喺過去嗰一百年嘅歷史，最
大嘅邪惡就係共產黨。（歡呼）所以，你唔好再聽嗰班泛民嗰啲人講，結束一黨專政，民主
回歸中國，嗰班友，癲嘅！（歡呼）你結束一黨專政之後，你係結束邊個黨啊？咪共產黨，
咪仍然喺度！我哋要完全將共產黨踢出人類歷史，香港先能夠自保。（歡呼）

“Hong Kong Independence”. These words have never passed my lips. But I must
proclaim it today. I’ve always been talking about anti-communism, I’ve always
been talking about the biggest evil plaguing the entire world, including China,
Hong Kong, Europe, and Southeast Asia -- the Communist Party. [the crowd
cheers] That’s why all of you should stop listening to pan-democrats who want
to ‘end one-party dictatorship’ and ‘build a democratic China’: those people
are completely out of their minds! [the crowd cheers] After you’ve ended the
one-party-rule, is it the end of the party itself? The communist party, they
are still there! To safeguard Hong Kong, we must wipe out the Communist Party
from the history of mankind.

香港四百幾個區議員，我參加呢個超區選，我三月嗰時同大家講，個個都話支持。開口嘅四
十幾人，我呢個冇呃你嘅，真係四十幾人，一路一路噉落，佢哋講，去到最尾，陳國強，原
來你係一個本土派嘅人。我話你都癲嘅，我不嬲都係㗎啦！（笑聲）仲有人講，選區議員嗰
時，我哋泛民咁多人幫你手，原來你依家出賣咗泛民，我話你都痴線嘅，我不嬲都係講非建
制、非泛民㗎啦，你哋自己走埋嚟幫手咋嘛！（歡呼）但係，泛民嘅朋友，成個過程，我係
交待得好清楚嘅。我話，香港⋯⋯捍衛香港嘅文明，必須踢走共產黨。估唔到佢哋以為泛民都
係想踢走共產黨。香港最大嘅邪惡，除咗共產黨之外，就係共產黨嘅香港嘅代言人。以前我
淨係以為建制派係，原來泛民好多人都係共產黨嘅香港嘅代言人。（歡呼）
Out of more than 400 district councillors in Hong Kong, I decided to run for
the ‘super district council’ election. I told people about this in March,
everybody said they supported me. More than 40 people—this is for real—more
than 40 people told me they supported me. And it went on for a while, in the
end, they said, ‘James, I didn’t know you were a localist.’ I was like, “Are
you crazy? I’ve always been one!” [laughter] Someone even told me, ‘When you
were running for district councillor, many of us from the pan-democratic camp
came to your aid. And now you betrayed us.’ I told him, ‘Are you kidding me?
I’ve always said I was not in the pro-establishment camp, nor was I in the
pan-democrat camp. You guys made your own decision to help!’ [the crowd cheers]
Friends from the pan-democratic camp, I’ve always made my stance very clear. I
said, to safeguard Hong Kong’s civilisation, we must eradicate the Communist
Party from existence. It baffles me how some people believe that the
pan-democrats share this aim of ours. The biggest evil in Hong Kong, with the
exception of the Communist Party itself, are its spokesmen. In the past, I
thought these spokesmen were all from the pro-Beijing camp; little did I know
that the pan-democratic camp was also riddled with them. [the crowd cheers]

今日陳浩天搞呢個香港獨立第一次破天荒喺香港歷史上搞一個會，我哋依家見到好多朋友喺
到。以前我講，香港獨立係可能唯一一個，或者最大可能我哋探討香港前途最有機會保衞香
港嘅途徑。我哋經過今日之後，我話俾你聽，佢絕對係捍衞香港唯一一個途徑。香港獨立！
（香港獨立！）香港獨立！（香港獨立！）
Today’s rally organised by Chan Ho-tin marks the first time, in the history of
Hong Kong, we have come together for the independence of our city. It’s
heartwarming to see so many of you here tonight. I used to say that Hong Kong
independence might be the only way, or at least the best way, to safeguard our
city. After today’s rally, let me tell you: Hong Kong independence is, without
any doubt, the only way to safeguard our city. Hong Kong independence! (Hong
Kong independence!) Hong Kong independence! (Hong Kong independence!)

提提大家，如果今晚我哋有一萬人衝去政府總部，必定唔成功！（笑聲）點解？唔係話警察
阻住我哋，如果泛民嗰班友仔知道我哋有一萬人準備衝去政府總部，佢哋一定派二萬個aunt
ie同學生去包圍政府總部，阻止我哋去衝擊政府總部！（歡呼）我哋今日，去到今時今日，
香港四百幾個區議員，平時同我飲酒食飯嘅，唱好多歌，又話要香港獨立、保衞香港，嚟到
今日嘅得我一個。根本就係好多所謂嘅傘兵、勇武，同埋自以為好勁嘅人，當做咗區議員之
後，佢同我講：「James，我仲想做多一屆。」（笑聲）「我淨係想搞社區工作；社區唔應
該搞政治嘢。」我話如果係噉嘅話你當初你就唔好自認係傘兵！你當初就唔好同人講你佔領
過旺角，唔好［同人講你］佔領過中環。你班仆街！（歡呼）
A friendly reminder: if 10,000 of us chargedinto the Central Government Offices
tonight, we’d definitely fail! [laughter] And why is that? It’s not that the
police would get in our way; it’s that if the pan-democrats knew about our
plan, they’d get 20,000 aunties and students to surround the government offices
to prevent us from assaulting the government headquarters! [the crowd cheers]
The 400 district councillors in Hong Kong; we’d eat and drink and sing
together, and they’d tell me that Hong Kong should become independent and that
we should protect our city and things like that, but out of all these district
councillors, I am the only one who turned up at the rally today. Many
self-proclaimed ‘umbrella fighters’, ‘valiant defiants”, as well as those who
just feel too good about themselves, tell me after they’ve become district
councillors, ‘James, I just wanna stay on for another term.’ [laughter] ‘I just
wanna do community work. And community work shouldn’t involve politics.’ And I
tell them, if that is so, you don’t deserve to call yourself an ‘umbrella
fighter’ in the first place! And you don’t deserve to call yourself an occupier
of Mongkok, an occupier of Central! You motherfuckers! (Crowd cheers)

我從都唔認我係一個好窮嘅人嚟㗎。我喺倫敦大學讀書，我兩個degree，我根本就係好舒適
生活。你估我唔怕共產黨咩？我話俾你聽，我自從識咗陳浩天同天琦之後，我［se］都未［
se］過。（歡呼）香港革命成功，除咗學生、市民，我哋一定要攞到中產階級嘅支持。可惜
香港嘅中產階級奇奇怪怪，係嚿奇撚怪！大部分嘅中產階級攞住個外國passport，大部分嘅
有錢人攞住外國passport，仲有無數嘅區議員係攞住外國passport，跟住佢話代表我香港人
發言。所以，區議會——下屆區議會，所有揸住外國passport嘅人，應該係唔俾佢哋選嘅！（
歡呼）如果我哋做到呢樣嘢，民建聯死咗一大半！但係可能泛民都死咗一大半。唔緊要！我
哋大把本土派嘅朋友喺度，而家現場可能有五千人、八千人，我哋全部一齊去選區議會，就
隊冧班建制派，隊冧班泛民！
I’ll admit I’m not poor by any standard. I studied at the University of London,
and I have two degrees. In fact, if I wanted to, I could live a very
comfortable life. Do you think I’m not scared of the Communist Party? Well,
after I met Chan Ho-tin and Leung Tin-kei, I’ve become fearless! [the crowd
cheers] In order for our revolution to succeed, in addition to gaining the
support of students and the general public, we must win the support of the
middle class. Unfortunately, Hong Kong’s middle class is a complete
clusterfuck. Most of them hold foreign passports, just as most rich people do.
In fact, countless district councillors also hold foreign passports. And yet,
strangely enough, these are the same people who claim to speak for us Hong
Kongers. So, in the coming district council election, I say we ban all foreign
passport holders from running for office! [the crowd cheers] If we could do
that, more than half of the DAB would be gone! Although more than half of the
pan-democrats would probably be gone as well. But that’s okay! We have many
localist friends here—judging from what I see, probably 5,000 or even 8,000. If
we all ran for the district council election, we’ll kick the asses of those
pro-Beijing and pan-democrats

而家睇返呢個立法會，真係可以改革社會嘅，唔多過十個立法會議員。佢哋多一個、少一個
，改變唔到。因為今次最有機會改變香港嘅陳浩天同埋天琦，佢哋都冇得選！呢啲叫咩天理
？天琦講「得民心者得天下」，天琦，俾我駁你一句，錯，係「得選舉主任得天下」！如果
聽日有一個全民直選，一千人出嚟參選，個選舉主任講，只係得一個梁振英可以選，噉仲唔
係「得選舉主任得天下」？我年紀都唔細喇，我可能過多十年就死喇，我從來冇諗過過到三
十歲㗎，以我嘅生活習慣，咁鍾意飲酒。但係我見到陳浩天同埋天琦同埋各位勇士之後呢，
大家保佑我長命少少，我真係好希望見到佢哋香港獨立成功！（歡呼）
I could count with my fingers the number of LegCo members who could truly bring
change to our society. One more of them, one less of them, doesn’t make a
difference. Because Chan Ho-tin and Leung Tin-kei, the two candidates who are
most capable of making Hong Kong a better place, have been banned from running
in the election! What is the world coming to? Tin-kei said, ‘Whoever wins the
heart of the people wins the world.’ Tin-kei, let me fix that for you. The
maxim should’ve said ‘whoever wins the heart of the returning officer wins the
world’! Even if we had a direct election tomorrow with 1,000 candidates, what
could we do if the returning officer banned everyone but C. Y. Leung from
participating in it? If that is not ‘whoever wins the heart of the returning
officer wins the world’, then I don’t know what is! I ain’t young anymore, and
who knows? I might die in ten years’ time. To be honest, being the heavy
drinker that I am, I’ve never dreamed of living beyond the age of 30. But after
I met these brave souls like Chan Ho-tin and Leung Tin-kei, I want to be
blessed with a longer life, so that I can live long enough to witness the day
of Hong Kong’s independence!

香港獨立！（香港獨立！）踢走共產黨！（踢走共產黨！）香港獨立！（香港獨立！）踢走
共產黨！（踢走共產黨！）多謝各位！
Hong Kong independence! (Hong Kong independence!) Eliminate the Communist
Party! (Eliminate the Communist Party!) Hong Kong independence! (Hong Kong
independence!) Eliminate the Communist Party! (Eliminate the Communist Party!)
Thank you!

[ The English translation is released under Creative Commons, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 ]
