【八月五日　港獨集會　中出羊子發言】 (Nakade Hitsujiko’s Speech in the Hong
Kong Independence Rally on Aug 5)

抄本：IRay, Dolphin
英譯：Sidney, Marco, Timothy

中出羊子：
嗱！我頭先坐喺嗰個位嗰度，仲喺度揼緊份稿，點解呢？啲嘢嚟得太快啦。而且，都係啱啱
喺個籌備選舉嘅氣氛之中，啱啱將個腦換返過嚟。而且我亦都一路喺度準備緊我啲嚟緊嘅跟
進嘅工作，咁就無端端有個集會啦。咁最初以為幾千人，吖頂你個肺！咁撚墟冚嘅！係囉。
咁開頭亦都好，因為你知我一路嘅風格都唔係咁嚴肅啊，咁樣或者叫嬉笑怒罵又咁，唔知點
形容啦。咁但係一路就好驚會唔會自己嘅風格同呢個台，今次嘅活動好格格不入呢？咁都感
謝第一，感謝啊陳國強，將個氣氛就輕鬆咗好多。我真係心理障礙掃除咗好多。好，感謝你
。另外，亦都感謝香港民族黨。雖然有啲技術上問題，但係已經搞得好好。咁，有咩下次搵
我幫忙，技術上面嘅嘢我實幫手。咁第三，好多謝所有提名過我嘅新界西選民。我無辦法喺
呢一輪裡面去出戰，去俾你地去投。唔緊要，將來一定會有機會。亦都多謝我一眾嘅，網絡
嘅上面課金俾我去玩呢一個嘅選舉遊戲嘅金主，好多謝你地。呢個，騎劫呢個台嚟多謝你地
先。咁就，係咯。

Nakade Hitsujiko:
So! Just a moment ago, I was still working on my speech among the audience.
Why? Things just happened too quickly. Besides, I just pulled myself away from
thinking about the election, and I was thinking about what to do next. And then
I was invited to this assembly. I thought there might be just a few thousand
people, but... Holy Shit! Look at this fucking crowd here! Right. So, this is
how I begin my speech, you all know my style, I’m not a big fan for solemnity,
you may even say my style is a bit comedic, whatever you call it... I was a bit
worried that it would be out of place on this stage, but thanks to James Chan,
he set up a light atmosphere for the stage and my worries were much relieved.
Thank you. Also, I want to thank the Hong Kong National Party. Although there
were some technical difficulties, the event is nonetheless running quite
smoothly. By the way, let me help you next time, I will definitely help you
with the technical stuff. Thirdly, I want to thank everyone who nominated me in
the New Territories West Geographical Constituency. I can’t stand for the
election in this round, but no matter, we will definitely have a go next time.
I would also like to thank my benefactors online who gave me the fund necessary
for this election game. I'm really grateful. So, let me hijack this stage to
express my gratitude. Right.

因為大家睇我好似講嘢好唔叻啦。其實「咦唔係喎，中出羊子你Facebook咁多偉論咁多嘢講
，講到－」屌，枝咪向邊㗎？喂喂？「喂！中出羊子，你無理由講嘢咁廢㗎喎。你Facebook
啲文咁鬼多like，咁識鳩噏。」其實你睇吓我啲編輯紀錄，就知我每一篇嘢，都係edit、co
py-and-paste、刪刪減減，起碼十幾廿個revision。咁我就，唔係好識得講嘢啦。咁就，希
望大家都見諒啦。

As you can see, I'm not so good at making speeches. One might say, “Wait a
minute, Nakade Hitsujiko. You can't be *that* bad at public speaking! You have
so much to say on Facebook, your posts are so brilliant and they attract so
many likes, you’ve certainly mastered the art of bullshitting.” But in fact, if
you look at the edit history of my posts, you’ll see that there are a lot of
edits, copy-and-pastes, deletions and redactions, with at least a dozen or two
revisions. So you see, I am not good at speaking. I hope you will understand
that.

好多人問：「喂！中出羊子，你係咪痴線㗎呢？」係咪呢？（群眾：係！）啫係點啫？係定
唔係啫？（群眾：係！）我覺得，你問得呢句，我正常過你囉。我只不過係喺一個痴線嘅年
代，做緊最撚正常嘅嘢，係咯。咁，但係歷史就係好現實嘅。贏嗰個咪正常囉，輸嗰個咪痴
線囉。但係，咁我同你講：我一鳩定會贏俾你睇！我會證明俾你睇，你地呢班覺得我係痴線
嘅，你地先至係痴線囉。

People ask me, “Hey, Nakade Hitsujiko, are you crazy?”  Am I? (crowd: yes!) So,
what does this mean? Am I crazy or not? (crowd: YES!) In my opinion, if you had
to ask me this question, I’m really more normal than you. I am just doing the
most hyper-normal thing in an era of insanity. Right. But history is very
unforgiving. If you win, you’re “normal”. If you lose, you are crazy. But I
will tell you this: I will show you all, I will defin-fucking-itely win! I will
prove it to you all, all those who think I’m crazy, *you’re* the crazy ones.

咁，呢一次嘅篩選，唔單止係對五位候選人嘅一個侮辱，亦都係對無數香港選民嘅侮辱，尤
其對我嘅選民嘅侮辱。因為我知我今次有得選嘅話我一定贏撚梗。幾多支持者啊，大佬？

So, the screening of election candidates is not only an insult to the five of
us, it is also an insult to each and every voter in Hong Kong, especially the
ones voting for me. Because I know if I were able to stand for election, I will
abso-fucking-lutely win. How many supporters do I have? Come on, think about it.

幾多人想投我啊？喂大佬，大麻合法化，提倡大麻合法化喎！色情表演場，嗰個現場真人色
情表演合法化，四仔合法化，尺度與日本並齊，幾撚多人嘅心聲啊？仆你個街，無得選啝。
呢個唔單止係對我嘅侮辱，亦都係對香港起碼幾廿萬個準備會投我嘅選民嘅一個侮辱。呢個
係牽連甚廣，係侮辱咗好多嘅香港選民。但係，我知道好多人想投我啦，但係今次無機會去
俾你投。唔緊要，下次一定有機會㗎。因為呢單嘢一睇就知佢地戇居㗎，實有得重選嘅，屌
！幾時啫嘛，一年半載吖，兩年定三年吖嘛，鬥長命啫嘛而家同你。放心啦一定有得重選。
呢單嘢佢地係，我由第一日開始係有少少驚訝囉，啫係既係預算之內，亦係預算之外。預算
之內嘅就係，係咯佢地唔俾我選囉。預算之外嘅就係，我俾埋下台階你地俾我選，你地都唔
撚俾我選。喂，修改基本法，將香港特－唔係唔係。要求人大制訂一個新嘅法案，將香港特
別行政區範圍射上個moon，咁呢啲仲唔係主權真空囉，咪可以建國獨立囉。一係修改基本法
第一條，俾埋下台階佢俾我選，唔洗司法覆核乜乜物物。第時我贏得仲多票過你咪仲樣衰。
吖，你又唔制喎，真係蠢。

How many voters do I have? Come on — marijuana legalization, I’m advocating for
marijuana legalization for god’s sake! I am calling for the legalization of
erotic establishments, of live shows and of hardcore porn, being in line with
the japanese standards— just think about how many are dreaming for this? And
then, fuck you, you tell me I can’t stand for election. This is not only an
insult to me, this is also an insult to hundreds of thousands of voters who are
going to vote for me.  This is an extensive insult to a lot of voters in Hong
Kong. I know that a lot of people want to vote for me, but unfortunately you
don’t have a chance this time. No matter, you’ll have a chance next time.
Because you can see that they are idiots without even looking, of course we
will have a re-election, jeez! The question is *when* — is it one year, two
years or three years? It’s just a matter of time. Don’t worry, we will be able
to stand for re-election. About this incident, I was a bit surprised at first,
it is within my expectation but at the same time out of it as well. What I
expected was that they would ban me from running the election. What I didn’t
expect was that I was still banned even though I gave them a convenient excuse
to back down. Come on, amending the basic law to make Hong Kong Special… no,
no. Requesting the National People's Congress (NPC) to pass a new bill to
launch the legal boundaries of HKSAR onto the moon. Thus creating a lacuna in
Hong Kong’s sovereignty. Thus becomes a basis towards national independence.
Or, they could have just amended the first article of the Basic Law.  I gave
them a convenient excuse to let me run for the election, they can then avoid
judicial review and all that crap. If I win even more votes in the re-election,
you’ll just end up with more embarrassment.  But you didn’t take my offer. So
stupid.

咁，我無嗰啲咩好憤慨啊，悲傷啊，最黑暗一日，無囉。因為成件事對我地有利㗎。尤其我
由一開始主張嘅，雖然除咗有主張大麻合法化，情色表演合法化嗰啲嘢啦。咁但係我嘅主軸
，今年原本嘅選舉就係叫「國民外交」，確認香港嘅實然獨立。然後，邀請美國同香港中國
，香港嘅民選立法會議員代表，同埋中國一齊去北京，帶埋美軍上北京。「美國未嚟，我邀
請；美軍來了，我帶路。」去北京，進行一次嘅港，香港、中國、美國嘅三方會談。咁呢個
恐怕就無辦法喺嚟緊嘅一屆嘅立法會任期裡面搞得成。但係，我主張嘅嘢，點解我會主張呢
個呢？其實，香港人太過故步自封。我地咁多年嚟都係將我地嘅問題嘗試從內部去解決。喂
，咁多年啦！俾啲新意吖。內部問題我地一路都有做㗎啦，勇武抗爭，乜乜抗爭咁。但係，
可唔可以玩啲新意呢？勾結外國勢力，得唔得呢？你班撚樣，成日鬧人勾結外國勢力，嗰啲
咁嘅狗官。好囉，咁橫掂都係俾你鬧勾結外國勢力啊，咩美帝走狗啊，咁點解唔可以勾結一
次俾佢睇呢？係囉，真係。勾結結外國勢力，將香港嘅利益重新分配，瓜分佢嗰地港珠澳啊
，乜乜柒柒啊，機場三跑啊，高鐵啊，嗰啲建築嘅。唔好益嗰間中國建築先啦，益吓美國佬
唔好？益吓日本佬唔好？頂你個肺。嗰啲咁嘅又超資又超時，俾人又點啊豆腐渣。都唔知會
，都唔知會唔會爆炸㗎屌！咪係囉，勾結外國勢力，將香港嘅利益重新分配。咁而家，無辦
法喺呢一屆嘅任期裡面，去帶領一隊嘅國民外交團隊，去促成呢個香港主權前途嘅三方會談
。唔緊要，選舉事務處呢鑊係俾咗更加多嘅子彈我地去，更加多嘅理據啊，更加多嘅籌碼，
我去做呢一場嚟緊嘅國民外交。所以頭先都提緊我一路仲係度準備緊嘅一啲草擬緊嘅文件啊
，組織緊嘅一啲團隊啊，嚟緊去美國領事館反映呢一件事，去英國領事館反映呢一件事。希
望可以去到美國國會做一個嘅聽證會，話俾佢地知，我地香港人呢幾廿年係過緊啲咩日子。
頂你個肺，關門打狗呀？好好玩呀而家？玩夠未啊？打咗咁撚多年，你唔出嚟嗌救命呀？梗
係出去搵美國佬啦。香港唔單止係中國，唔單止係香港人，亦都係美國佬，呢度係好多嘅利
益，好多嘅嘢唔到大陸佬話事。當然，最歸根究底，係我地香港人話事。但係，我地都可以
得到一啲嘅助力，去進行一個嘅國際嘅談判。就住選舉事務處今次做呢一單嘢，已經係一個
一國兩制嘅破壞，甚至可能係北京落嘅指令。呢個已經係一個好好嘅理據，令到我可以提早
促成呢一場嘅國民外交，要求外國勢力介入關注香港嘅主權前途，容許香港嘅建國獨立。

So, I don’t have none of those anger, sadness, or proclamations like “the
darkest day”. I have none of that. Because the whole farce is good for us.
Especially for my original proposal, in addition to legalising marijuana,
legalizing erotic shows, etc., the keystone in my election platform for this
year is “Diplomacy by Nationals”, to confirm the de-facto independence of Hong
Kong. And then, we’ll invite America, and representatives of the Hong Kong
Legislative Council, and the Chinese. We’ll go to Beijing together, we’ll bring
along the US military to Beijing. “If the Americans aren’t here yet, I’ll
invite them; If the Americans are already here, I’ll lead the way.” In Beijing,
the three parties: Hong Kong, China and US will hold three-party talks on the
prospect of the sovereignty of Hong Kong. However, I’m afraid this cannot be
achieved in my first term of office. But, why am I advocating this? Actually,
Hong Kong people are too afraid to think outside the box. All these years we
have tried to solve our problems internally, but hey, it has been so many years
already!! It’s time for some new ideas. We’ve been working on solving the
problems internally as always — “valiant defiance”, or resisting with whatever
method. But, can we have some innovation already? Can’t we “collude with
foreign forces”? You fucktards always claim the anti-establishment is
“colluding with foreign forces”, those lapdog officials. Very well, if we’re
going to be accused of “colluding with foreign forces” anyway, if you’re going
to call us “running dogs of America” whatever, why can’t we do it once for
real? Right. Really. Collude with foreign forces, and redistribute the
interests in Hong Kong. Let us split the profits of “Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macau”,
and those damn things, like the third airport runway, the “high-speed” railway,
those engineering projects. At least we shouldn’t let the profits go only to
the China State Construction company. Why don’t we let the profits go to the
Americans? Why not the Japanese? Fuck that shit. Those (Chinese) projects run
over-budget and over-time, if we give them to others, so what? Those rotten
projects, I don’t know, I don’t know if they would explode, damn! So that’s it,
collude with foreign forces, and redistribute the interests in Hong Kong. But
now, I won’t be able to form a delegation and lead them on a diplomatic mission
with the three parties, I won’t be able to do this in the first term. Doesn’t
matter, the Registration and Electoral Office (sic) gave us even more
ammunition, even more justifications, even more bargaining chips, to conduct
this “diplomacy by nationals”. So, I was saying, I was drafting some documents,
planning to form some delegations, to go to the US embassy to let them know
about this, to go to the British Consulate to let them know about this. I hope
we can attend a US congressional hearing, and let them know how Hong Kong
people have been living for these twenty-something years. Damn that shit, you
think they can close the doors and beat us like dogs? You think it is fun? Are
you done with it already?  They’ve been oppressing us for so fucking many
years, aren’t you going to come out and shout for help? Of course we will seek
out the Americans! Hong Kong is not only about China, not only about Hong Kong
people, it is also about Americans. There are so many interests at stake here,
and a lot of them are not controlled by the Mainlanders. Of course, in the end,
we, Hong Kongers, are the ones calling the shots, but we can benefit from
outside assistance, to conduct international negotiations. Regarding this
incident about Registration and Electoral Office (sic), it’s already a
subversion of the “One Country, Two Systems” principle, it’s even possible that
this was an order from Beijing. This is already a very convincing argument, to
allow us to facilitate this round of “diplomacy by nationals”, to request
foreign forces to be concerned about and to intervene in the future of Hong
Kong, and ultimately allow Hong Kong to build its own nation and become
independent.

可能問，喂，諗返我點解會企喺度呢？其實講真我又唔識講嘢，我真係唔撚鍾意搞政治，我
唔係搞政治嘅人材。但係，我本來撈IT㗎大佬！我而家都撈緊IT，對機器開心過對人添，日
日對住嗰班吓，後面嗰班撚樣。咁但係香港，點解我會行到呢一步？因為無未來。點解啊？
2047，主權嘅一個嘅大限令到我地。以IT界為例，香港嘅IT係咩？人地Google做緊咩啊？好
多嘅hacker啊，研發緊新嘅網絡嘅技術啊，最頂尖嘅技術。喂，香港高地價，仲唔係應該發
展呢啲咁嘅長期投資啊，高端嘅一啲嘅研發。吖，頂你個肺，香港嘅IT係咩啊？customer
service囉，deployment囉。仲有咩話？（群眾：IT狗！）IT狗囉咪。喂大佬啊，香港人咁
撚醒，我地嘅祖先長輩，攬住個籃球游水落嚟，喺戰亂之中槍林彈雨，要死嘅都死哂。喂，
經過品質篩選，基因優良，全世界最聰明嘅人就喺香港。仲有咩話？兩文三語。頂你個肺，
要我地做customer
service，做deployment？所以呢，我唔想搞政治，但係為咗我可以有一個比較好嘅事業吖
，前途啦，咁我都要點啊？fix返好呢部機器。啫係點啊？高層次嘅地方搞唔掂，一路就修
理下層嗰層嘢囉。最後發覺原來個根基就係香港人嘅。我地呢度睇唔到未來，而家我嚟到呢
一度，唔係要講啲咩最黑暗歷史。我嚟呢一度係要贏，同埋創造一個俾大家睇到嘅一啲嘅未
來。

Maybe you’ll ask, hey, why am I standing here? Seriously, I don’t know how to
speak, and I really fucking hate politics, I don’t have what it takes to play
with politics. But, I was working in the Information Technology sector, come
on! I’m still doing IT now, I like interfacing with machines more than humans.
Who wants to deal with those fucktards over there (Central Government Complex)
at the back? But why have I taken this step? Because there’s no future. Why? In
2047, the sovereignty limitation will make us… So let’s take IT for example.
What is IT in Hong Kong? What are they doing over there at Google? They have a
lot of hackers, they are researching and developing new network technologies.
Damn it! What is IT in Hong Kong? Customer service! Deployment! And what else?
(Crowd: IT dog!) Yes, IT dog. Hey come on, Hong Kong people are so fucking
smart, our ancestors and elders, they swam here by clinging onto a basketball,
they faced guns and bullets in war and turmoil, those who should be dead are
dead already. Hey, after this screening process, we have superior genes, the
most intelligent people in the whole world are in Hong Kong. And what else?
“Bi-literacy and Tri-lingualism”. Damn you, you want me to do customer service,
to do deployment? That’s why, I don’t want to get involved in politics, but in
order to have a better career and a better future for myself, what do I need to
do? I have to fix this machine. What does this entail? If you can’t fix it on a
high level, you drill deeper down to fix the fundamentals. In the end I
realised the fundamental problem is that Hong Kong people cannot see their
future. I’ve come here, not to proclaim the darkest hour in our history. I’m
here to win, I’m here to create a future that you can all look up to and aspire
to.

咁，感謝選舉主任，你對我地嘅封殺係一個嘅認證。如果你唔封殺呢五位候選人，包括我在
內，咁我都好驚「仆街喇，係咪行撚錯路呢？」咁今日都好多謝。

So, thanks to the returning officers: you validated us by shutting us out. If
you didn’t shut out these five candidates, including me, then I would be
wondering “shit, have I tread on the wrong path?” So, today, I thank you very
much.

香港，我睇落我啲行為好瘋癲但係我覺得有時呢個地方比較瘋癲。點解呀？喂，我地啲字咁
靚。你睇吓呢四隻字幾靚。點解要我地啲學生學嗰啲咁嘅殘體字啊？甩皮甩⻣，aam4 aam4
caam4
caam4。今日我地啲老師，高薪請我地嘅老師教佢地咩係正體字，咩係粵語啦大佬。呢啲咪
痴線囉。

Hong Kong. I may look crazy to some of you, but I think this place is sometimes
even more crazy. Why? Hey, these four characters are so beautiful. Just look at
how beautiful they are. Why do our students have to learn those crippled
(simplified) characters? They look as if they’re falling apart, like it’s
crumbled and fractured. Today our teachers, we should pay our teachers well, to
teach them what orthodox Chinese characters are, what Cantonese is, come on.
This is what I mean by crazy, sigh.

仲有，三千億美金外匯儲備可以養起我地每一個香港人，日日唔洗撈，日日陽光海灘，晚晚
叫雞飲酒。要我地打嗰幾份九千蚊，萬零蚊嘅閪工？租間劏房都要五六千？有無病啊？係咪
痴線㗎？
當一個社會嘅人，點講呢？佢地唔願意面對其實個體制係痴線，咁咪將嗰個痴線嘅責任，將
個問題歸鳩於喺，歸究於喺我地。係囉，一啲睇落最正常嘅人身上囉。咁但係唔緊要，我會
用贏嚟去話俾佢地知佢地先至係痴線。我會整返好呢部機器。

Also, three hundred billion US dollars in the foreign currency reserve, it’s
enough to allow every Hong Kong person to live decently, don’t have to work,
just sunbathe on the beach every day, and hire prostitutes and drink every
night. You want us to slave away at a HK$9000 or HK$10,000/month job? And live
in a subdivided room that rents for five or six thousand? Are you ill? Are you
crazy? When a person in society, how do I put it? If they don’t want to face
the fact that the system is crazy, they would just place crazy
responsibilities, fucking blame… blame it on us. Right, blame it on those who
look most normal on surface. But this is no big deal, I will win, to let them
know it is they who are crazy. I will fix this machine.

我地要香港建國獨立，唔單止係要港獨咁簡單，呢啲太過簡單喇。港獨有幾難啫？我做俾你
睇。香港建國獨立，唔單止係要獨立，更加係要「要錢有錢，要地有地，要女人有女人」！
我地要成為一個香港帝國。

We want Hong Kong to build its own nation and become independent. Not only
become independent, this is too easy. How hard can Hong Kong Independence be?!
I’ll show you how to do it. We want to build the Hong Kong nation and achieve
independence, not only independence. We want “if you need money, we’ll give you
money; if you need land, we’ll give you land; if you need women, we’ll give you
women”! We will become the Hong Kong Empire.

嗱，時間差唔多，我以為講唔哂。共產黨呢廿年嚟，俾咗香港人嘅一啲嘅生活，已經－其實
好難講㗎。你問我，其實常識講出嚟，喂搞港獨建國係常識嚟㗎嘛！要我點解要講㗎啫大佬
？我成日有時喺街站嗰度，講講吓都有啲心傷，好難講。如果淨返三分鐘就提我啦。但係，
咁撚易管嘅香港佢地都管唔好，俾我地一啲咁嘅生活，咁佢地抵死吖。廿年嚟，喂香港人有
幾易管啫？有份工，安份守己，一個良好嘅上進機會，政府門面又懶係公平咁樣。仲有啲咩
啊？得閒有啲娛樂。吓，我為大家提供咗好多娛樂啦當然。喂，咁咪管治到囉。嗱，所以香
港建國獨立之後呢，如果我做臨時政府又好，皇室又好呢，我就開心咯。因為香港人其實好
易管，係佢地唔識管，佢地笨柒。

So, time is almost up, I thought I couldn’t finish everything. In these twenty
years, the Communist Party, the life they gave Hong Kong people, it’s already —
it’s really hard to talk about it. If you ask me, it’s just common sense. Hey
come on, promoting Hong Kong independence and nation building is just common
sense! Why do you want me to explain it, come on! Sometimes when I’m promoting
my cause on the street booths, I feel sad while talking about it, it’s really
hard to talk about it. (to organisers) Tell me when I have 3 minutes left. But,
Hong Kong is such an easy place to govern, and they fail at it, they give us
such a life, they really deserve to be damned. In these twenty years, hey how
hard is it to govern Hong Kong people? Give them a job, they will stay out of
trouble, just give them a good chance of upward mobility, just have the
government departments pretend to be fair, just like that. And what else? Give
them some entertainment. Huh, I’ve been providing a whole lot of entertainment
to you already, of course. Hey, good governance is as simple as this. So, after
Hong Kong builds its nation and becomes independent, if I join the interim
government, or if I become one of the royalty, I’m going to be very happy.
Because Hong Kong people are really easy to govern, it’s just that they suck at
governance, they’re fucking dickheads.


嗱，我有時都好心灰意冷。我會諗我係咪應該移民啊，走人啊？去加拿大邊度邊度？但係我
心諗，我咁有能力，我都唔喺度搞，我都，點講呢？呢一壇嘢，擺明係得我地搞到嘅，啫係
我地去牽動起呢一場嘅時代革命。如果我走咗，你地點算呢？咁，所以我隨時可以走人，但
係我唔會，我會喺度玩到最後一刻。我會日以繼夜，夜以繼日，同佢地玩落去。點解？因為
，嗱呢個唔係糾察章，我唔係佔中糾察。呢個係咩啊？香港皇室，原本係諗住留返嚟選舉街
站用嘅。但係今日首次喺度亮相，因為都無咗選舉街站。我而家喺度做個鄭重聲明：我，中
出羊子，係香港皇室成員。呢度嘅國民嘅榮辱，就係我本人嘅榮辱。我唔會走，我會留喺度
，直到成功一刻。亦都向北京政府、習近平先生作出一個最後嘅警告：香港嘅建國獨立係歷
史嘅必然，我地必定會成為鄰國。但係到底香港同中國之間最終嘅關係，只有兩個可能性：
一係盟國、一係敵國，你自己揀！呢個選擇權，唔喺我地呢邊嘅手上，希望北京黨中央，鄰
國嘅黨中央可以務實做人。支爆啦，醒醒定定！到底係帶美軍上嚟同你飲罰酒，定還是帶五
百個城邦軍曹上嚟人民大會堂同你飲下青島，暢談呢一個華夏歷史文明，交返畀佢地去決定
。

Look, sometimes I’m depressed as well. I sometimes wonder whether I should
emigrate and leave this place. To Canada, or wherever. But then I think: I’m
such a genius, if I don’t fix things here, I will… how do I put it? This
problem, it’s only us who can fix it. Only we can spark off this revolution of
a new era. If I left this place, what about you? What about all of you? So,
even though I can leave at any time, I won’t. I will stay here until the final
moment. I will fight against them, night after night, day after day. Why,
because, look at this armband, it’s not a prefect badge, I’m not a prefect of
the “Occupy Central Movement”. What is this? The Hong Kong Royal Family. I
originally intended to wear this when campaigning in the election. But I’m
showing this off for the first time, because I don’t have a street booth any
more. I hereby proclaim solemnly: I, Nakade Hitsujiko, am a member of the Hong
Kong Royal Family. The dignity of my subjects here, is also a matter of my
personal dignity. I won’t leave, ever. I will stay here, until I succeed. I’m
also giving a final warning to the Beijing government, to Mr. Xi Jinping: Hong
Kong national building and independence is our historical destiny, we will
definitely become neighbouring countries. But will we be friendly states or
hostile states? You choose! This choice is not ours. I hope Beijing’s central
committee, the party central committee of our neighbour, I hope they can be
pragmatic. China’s economy is about to explode, watch out! Whether we will
bring along Americans and subjugate you, or whether we will bring five hundred
city-state officers to the Great Hall of the People and talk about our great
Chinese traditions over a few rounds of Tsingtao beer, I’ll let them decide.

最後就係，到底呢度咁多香港人，其實都睇唔到有幾多，咁多香港嘅準國民，呢一場嘅時代
革命，唔單只係我，唔單只係呢度咁多位嘅港獨派、或者泛建國派嘅候選人嘅責任，我地每
一個人香港都可以喺自己嘅崗位裡面，去做好我地應該做嘅嘢。例如，哦你搵錢好掂嘅，哦
搵多啲錢，課金丫，冇所謂。遲啲支爆啦，啲租金下降，買間廠，準備復興香港嘅工業。日
常嘅生活，我地可以唔需要用市民啦咁……我地雖然既係……根據城邦論啦，我地既係市民，亦
都係一個自治城邦啦，既係市民，亦都係國民。但係喺呢個時候，我地更加需要由日常生活
開始，喂！改下啲字眼啦……咁多位香港嘅準國民，大家好！嗱，呢啲一點一滴，咪可以係一
個⋯冇人叫你下下出嚟衝出嚟打咖大佬。用晒所有嘅可能性，喺你能力範圍之內，每個人做
好自己嘅本份，香港人堅守自己嘅崗位，去完成呢一場時代革命，我地一定可以成功。呢一
個睇落好黑暗，但係，我希望佢地……點講呢？我地唔怕更加黑暗，就讓暴風雨嚟得更加激烈
一點，香港人要有作為一個貴族嘅霸氣，畀啲霸氣佢睇，喂！唔好日日黑暗啊，咩我地係雞
蛋佢地係高牆，喂！屌，我地係磚頭！掟鳩散你，得唔得？畀啲霸氣自己！

Finally, how many people are here, I can’t count them all. So many Hong Kong
nationals-to-be, this revolution of the era, it’s not only me, it’s not only
the responsibilities of the pro-independence, or pan-nation-building
candidates. Every single one of us in Hong Kong can do what needs to be done in
their own position. For example, oh you’re good at making money, please make
more money, and donate to us. Whatever. The Chinese economy is going to explode
soon, rent will go down, buy a factory, prepare to revive the manufacturing
industries in Hong Kong. As for daily life, we don’t need to use citizens…
although we, according to the City-State Theory, we are citizens, and we are
also an autonomous city state. We are citizens and we are nationals. But at
these times, we have an even pressing need to start from our daily lives… hey!
Let’s change our vocabulary a bit. All you nationals of Hong Kong, I greet you!
Look, these small things, they can be a… nobody told you to charge and fight
every single time, come on. Exhaust all options that are within your abilities,
do what you ought to do. Hong Kong people should hold steady onto their own
positions, to complete this revolution of our era. We will definitely be
successful. It may seem dark now, but, I hope they, how do I put it? We won’t
be afraid of darker times. Let the storm rage ever stronger! Hong Kong people
should have the audacity to become a member of the nobility. Show them our
courage! Hey, don’t just complain it’s “dark” every day, to hell with “we are
eggs and they are the high wall”. What the hell! Fuck it, we are bricks! We
will hit you and you’ll collapse, can’t we do that? Give yourself a fearsome
spirit!

嗱！最後！忠告所有反對香港建國獨立嘅人，今日我地搞港獨，唔撚會問你意見，點解啊？
因為當年九七主權移交，同樣冇問過我地呢班後生仔意見！今日搞港獨，搞建國獨立，都唔
撚會問你意見！依家佢地只有兩個可能，兩個出路，就係咩呢？香港建國獨立就梗咖啦，一
係執定包袱，準備香港建國獨立之後，返去北方強國，感受身為中華民族嘅光輝同埋榮耀，
嗰啲咩呢全球最不受歡迎嘅遊客啊、嗰啲三鹿奶粉啊、大頭奶粉啊、健全嘅法制啊、無私嘅
黨嘅體制啊呢啲就留返畀佢地受，就輪唔到我！一係懺悔，信本土，回歸為香港人，準備成
為香港嘅國民！

Look! Finally! I have some advice for all those who oppose Hong Kong nation
building and independence: today, we’re going to strive for independence, and
we’re not going to ask your bloody opinion about it! You only have two options.
What are they? It’s a given that Hong Kong will be established as a nation and
become independent. You can either pack up and go back to the “Strong Country”
in the north, to gleam in the glamour of being a Chinese national -- the most
unwelcome tourist, those contaminated milk powder scandals, comprehensive
systems of laws, selfless one-party systems, those things we’ll just leave it
to you people to experience, and it won’t be me who will suffer! Or, you can
repent, believe in localism, become a Hong Kong citizen again, and prepare to
become a national of Hong Kong!


支持香港建國獨立係積福除障，香港建國獨立係有諸天神佛保佑嘅一件嘅世紀大事業，凡敢
抵擋侵擾，必遭天譴，必落地獄！反對港獨嘅，或者九七年支持過主權移交嘅，而家畀個機
會你懺悔！嗱，講啲好好笑嘅嘢，有日有個街站，有個阿叔走埋嚟跪拜我，話我係皇室丫嘛
，跪拜我，佢想拜殺我……（畀多一分鐘）……拜殺我。但係點知，我受得起。拜丫！為你積福
除障啊！依家就係畀個機會咁多位九七年默許過主權移交嘅香港人去懺悔，回歸成為香港人
，依家就係畀個機會你去消除呢一個嘅孽障！不至於落地獄，反得呢個身為香港人嘅榮耀。

Those who support Hong Kong nation building and independence will be blessed,
and their sins forgiven. There are various gods and buddhas who will bless this
epic event of the century. Those who dare obstruct it will be damned. They will
burn in hell! Those who oppose independence, or those who supported the
transfer of sovereignty in 1997, I’m now giving you a chance to repent! Look,
I’ll tell you a funny story. One day, when I was standing beside a street
booth, a man came over and knelt before me, he said I’m a member of the
royalty, so he knelt in front of me, he wanted to kill me with shame… (please
give me one more minute). But he didn’t know that I will proudly accept his
adoration.  Kneel! Revere me! You will be blessed and your sins forgiven! All
of you who allowed the transfer of sovereignty to happen in 1997, I’m now
giving you a chance to repent, and to become a Hong Konger again. Now is your
chance to relieve your sins, and avoid burning in hell, and instead bathe in
the glory of being a Hong Konger.

最後，香港建國獨立！香港建國獨立！香港建國獨立！嚟緊我仲會有大範圍勾結外國勢力嘅
國民外交行動，留意我 Facebook，多謝各位！

Lastly… Build the Hong Kong nation, become independent! Build the Hong Kong
nation, become independent! Build the Hong Kong nation, become independent!

Going forward, I will conduct “diplomacy by nationals” though a massive
operation to collude with foreign forces. Stay tuned for more information on my
Facebook. Thank you!

[ The English translation is released under Creative Commons, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 ]
