【八月五日　港獨集會　無待堂發言】 (Lewis Loud's Speech in the Hong Kong
Independence Rally on Aug 5)

抄本：Chaak
英譯：Chaak, Judy, Sidney


喂喂喂喂喂，嘩，啲聲幾好喎。Um......希望大家仲係度啦！因為個集會比較長呀，我自己
都等到有啲緊張咁樣。

Testing, testing, testing, wow, the sound is good. Um… I hope everyone is still
around because this rally is kind of long. I’ve been waiting a while and that
makes me kind of nervous.


咁因為er,
即係我哋點解齊集喺呢度呢？除咗因為香港獨立之外呢，當然仲有呢個選管會嘅嗰個問題啦
。咁但係我諗選管會嘅嘢呢，頭先嗰五位啦，同埋其他嘉賓都應該講過好多。咁我就講第二
啲嘢。

And that’s because, well actually why are we all gathered at this place? Other
than independence for Hong Kong, of course there was the issue with electoral
affairs commission. Regarding the electoral affairs commission, the five of
them, and other guests, have discussed it in great detail. So I’m going to say
something else.


講吓我認識之中嘅陳浩天同埋梁天琦咁樣啦。因為佢哋兩個叫做都係呢件事嘅一個主角咁樣
，我覺得。或者佢哋。因為我叫做喺現實生活識佢哋啦咁。咁，喺大概一年之前呢，香港仲
未有人知道邊個係梁天琦嘅，亦都未有人知道邊個叫做陳浩天咁樣，我喺一個網台嘅一餐飯
嗰度見過。即係同阿梁天琦同枱食飯咁樣。因為我，wrap一圍枱咁樣。咁，嗰陣時我唔知佢
係邊個嚟㗎。我知邊個係黃台仰，因為黃台仰喺嗰陣時係召集人咁樣。咁梁天琦同佢一齊出
現㗎都係都。

Let’s talk about my impression about Chan Ho-tin and Edward Leung. Because they
are like the protagonists of this incident, I reckon. And because I know them
in real life. Well, it was about a year ago. No one in Hong Kong knew who
Edward Leung is, and Chan Ho-tin neither. We met in a dinner gathering of an
online podcast channel. So I was like having a meal together with Edward Leung.
A round table.  At that time I didn’t know who he was. I knew Ray Wong, because
he was the convenor of Hong Kong Indigenous, and Edward Leung would appear with
him.


但係，我係冇同佢講過嘢㗎。我係估唔到，或者嗰陣時個梁天琦個樣呢同頭先佢上嚟嗰時都
係唔同㗎。你大家睇返啲相吖。真係唔同㗎。er
自從初一之後呢，梁天琦個樣係唔同咗㗎。佢有一，如果用，即係好玄學咁講呢，佢個面有
股氣㗎，或者係有股油光㗎。er
唔係人人都會有呢樣嘢㗎。而我係喺陳浩天嗰度呢亦都見到，呢浸氣囉。就唔係話佢哋嗰個
處境好好啊，而係，er
我覺得你真心咁相信，或者去推動一啲嘢嘅時候呢，人人都會有啲類似嘅變化㗎，喺個樣度
都睇得到㗎。

But we didn’t talk. I couldn’t imagine, or perhaps because Edward Leung looked
very different than what you saw when he was on stage just now. You check out
the photos. He looked different. Hmm, since the lunar new year, Edward Leung
has started to look different. If you use mystic terms, you can feel a strong
“chi” or “aura” emitting from his face. I also see that in Chan Ho-Tin. Not
that they are in a good situation. It’s that I believe if you put effort into
making things happen, everyone will undergo such changes. You can see it from
their faces.


咁香港獨立呢，即係我之前諗到個問題就係呢，雖然大家就覺得嗱，而家嗰五個人呢就受到
呢個選管會嘅剝奪咁樣。咁就好似只係五個人，其實係多過五個人㗎。因為例如我，大家諗
起啦，我下一屆戚起條筋去選立法會咁樣，雖然唔知會有幾多票咁樣，咁但係佢就會同我講
嘞，喂，佢會攞返你嗰啲你網上面講過嘅嘢啦，又或者係你啲書啦，然之後就會同你講話，
「你之前講過獨立㗎噃。」咁樣。就最屈機嗰樣嘢就係，我可以話我而家「戒獨」得唔得呀
？我而家唔再獨喇咁樣，我悔改喇我，我知道中國係幾偉大，我知道即係中央對我哋幾好喇
，咁樣。佢可以話你悔改係唔真心㗎喎。咁，當佢係可以有權力去代你講埋你係咪真心嘅時
候，我係唔知道點玩㗎。咁即係話好多個人支持過香港獨立啦，講過香港獨立啦，又或者sh
are過嗰個post啦，咁可能之後都會作為一個證據啦，就話我認為你係支持，而且你將來都
會繼續支持所以我就唔俾你參選咁樣。

Well, Independence for Hong Kong. The question I’ve come up with, is that
although you may think now it’s five candidates being deprived of their rights
by the commission, like only five people. But in fact it’s more than that. For
example, if I, out of the blue, should decide to run for the Legco. I don’t
know how many votes I would get, but I could imagine what they’d say to me.
Hey, they will dig up what you have said online, or in your books, and tell you
something like, “Hey, you talked about independence before.” Just like that.
And the most crazy thing about their undefeatable logic is this: What if I give
up independence? Now I decide not to go for independence. I repent. I know how
great China is. I know how fondly the Central government is treating us. Okay,
they can judge that your repentance is not whole-hearted. In that way, when
they have the power to decide on your behalf whether you mean what you say, I
really don’t know how to play this game. Many people have supported
independence for Hong Kong. Many have spoken about it, or shared a post about
it. So in the future this can become a piece of evidence, for them to decide
that you do support, and will continue to support (independence) and therefore
they will not allow you to run.


咁實際上而家我哋見到嘅乜嘢呢？就係香港已經唔係一個有選舉嘅地方喇。 er
咁樣嘅選舉同人大嘅人大選舉係有乜嘢分別呢？我係見唔到好多嘅。咁所以就頭先佢哋講嘅
野都好啱嘅。即係話，我哋要好漫長咁樣去累積香港獨立嘅支持者同埋資源，資源好緊要㗎
。佢哋都好冇錢㗎我知道。即係搵啲地方、搵啲方法捐俾佢哋啦真係。真係佢哋係好冇錢㗎
。同埋佢哋連戶口都開唔到㗎我知道係。咁，你見到而家個場好似好大咁樣，好多人咁樣。
其實返到去咪又係嗰個工廠大廈？大家係要理解吓喺呢個咁嘅光芒之下，或者佢有光環，又
或者佢有傳媒曝光呢，佢可能會有呢個好多外國嘅傳媒啦，風雲人物啦，但係佢哋係好冇錢
。

So what do we actually see here? It is that Hong Kong is no longer a place with
election. How is such election different from the elections of the National
Standing Committee? I don’t see much. That’s why what they said just now is
very true. We need to slowly gather supporters and resources for the cause of
independence for Hong Kong. Resources are crucial. They are really broke. I
know. So find a way to donate money to them, seriously. They really have no
money. They couldn’t even open a bank account, as far as i know. Now you may
think we have a big venue now. But when they go back, it will be just a flat in
an industrial building. You have to understand that under the spotlight,
perhaps they will have a “halo”, or they are covered by the media, perhaps they
are reported even by foreign journalists, person of the year, whatever. But,
they have no money.


er
曾經喺呢度，曾經有個台係綠色嘅。「窮人生仔，做乜鳩！」咁樣，嗰度呀講緊。嗰個大台
，嗰個大台，有好多風雲人物，只係兩年之前啫。有啲風雲人物呢雖然佢喺香港已經不再風
雲喇，但係佢好多錢𠺢嘛。唔知點解佢哋去一去七一集會，明明七一集會都係兩三萬人，佢
哋可以籌到幾廿萬𠺢嘛。我喺度諗，點解獨派做唔到呢？點解我哋冇呢個籌款能力呢？係咪
我哋啲人唔夠佢靚仔，係咪我哋啲人唔夠靚女呢？係因為乜嘢呢？係因為我哋個包裝唔夠好
？定係乜嘢呢？我諗諗吓發現，原來，我哋，即係所謂香港獨立，支持香港獨立嘅獨派，點
解唔會儲到咁多錢，就係因為香港獨立嘅人就係講自己係香港獨立。佢係講咗嗰一個，我哋
係有一個，想做嘅嘢，打開口牌㗎其實依個係。我想點點點點點。但係做一個成功嘅政治家
呢，或者一個成功嘅政客呢，你係唔可以俾人知你係支持呢套嘢。你隨時可以改變，隨時可
以轉。所以我喺呢個集會上面，上到嚟嘅，其實我都唔覺得係政客囉。因為佢哋好明顯已經
入唔到閘㗎啦，又冇做呢個政客嘅資格呀咁樣。咁所以資源係好緊要㗎。

Once upon a time, at this very same place, there was a stage. It was green in
colour. “Poor people having kids, what the hell!” (referring to the parody of
the so-called official “announcement” of the commencement of Occupy Central).
So I was talking about that centralised stage. A lot of influential people
stood on that stage back then. It was just two years ago. Some of them are no
longer influential, but they got lots of money don’t they. For some reason, in
the 1st July rally, they can raise hundreds of thousands of dollars, even
though the number of participants is twenty or thirty thousand. I was thinking,
why can’t pro-independence folks do the same? Why don’t we have this kind of
fund-raising ability? Are our men are not as handsome as they are? Are our
women on not hot enough? What’s the reason? Is our branding not good enough? Or
what? I kept thinking and I realised why, us, folks that support so-called
independence for Hong Kong, the pro-independence folks, could not save up
money. It’s because pro-independence people state clearly that we are
pro-independence. We have spoken what we want to do. It’s like showing all our
cards, telling everyone what exactly we want. But as a successful statesman, or
a successful politician, you can never let someone know that you support this
idea. You can change your stance anytime, you can switch any time. So in this
rally, everyone who stood on this stage, to me, are not politicians. They are
clearly barred from the election, and do not meet the prerequisites for being a
politician. That’s why resources are really important.

一直以嚟呢，本土派都係好散兵，好遊勇。甚至係喺初期嘅時候，即係我叫做開始對呢樣嘢
發生興趣，然之後開始寫得多嘅時候或者講得多嘅時候呢，首先就係呢，係經過大量嘅打壓
而出現嘅呢樣嘢係。喺佔領中環之前，喺佔領中環呢嚿嘢，呢個概念之前，你喺，如果你有
幸喺主流同埋有幸不幸同你非主流傳媒有個位咁樣，咁你話你寫香港獨立或者係支持本土，
都係會受到排擠嘅，
然之後，傳媒嘅大亨係會同你講，落咗張memo紙係全間公司都會知道呢，唔好俾佢講咁多本
土嘅聲音。因為呢，會俾人當係，我哋張報紙會俾人當係港獨報紙呀咁樣。講港獨呢係有代
價㗎，有人會選唔到啦，有人會佢做緊嘅生意啦，我見到有一個開糖水舖嘅朋友呢佢本來有
啲訪問，廣告要做啦。點知佢 share
咗幾個香港獨立嘅post之後呢，對方就即刻同佢打退堂鼓嘞，就唔再做訪問喇咁樣。呢啲代
價佢話佢負得起。或者，有啲人掟完磚之後佢好難搵返工咁樣。呢四個字其實好.....好撚
沉重㗎「香港獨立」係真係好撚沉重㗎。er
但係都照講吖，即係佢哋問我，問我嚟唔嚟嘅話，當然咁多傳媒呢，我有落埋水同佢哋玩㗎
真係。

Up until now, localists are less organised, like militias or guerrillas. Even
in the beginning, i.e. when I started to be interested in this, and started
writing or talking about this, at first, it (localism) emerged in response to a
lot of oppression. Before Occupy Central, before concept was developed, if you,
luckily or unluckily, had a column in any traditional media. Then if you wrote
that you supported independence for Hong Kong or Localism, you will be
sidelined. And then, some media tycoon will say to you, or send a memorandum to
the whole company, saying “don’t let them talk about localist ideas”. Because,
this will lead people to think that our newspaper is a pro-Hong Kong
independence newspaper. So just talking about independence for Hong Kong has a
cost. You may not get to run for election. You may be running a business and… I
saw that a friend of mine who runs a sweet-soup shop. He had an interview, some
sort of advertisement. You know what, after he shared several posts about
independence for Hong Kong, the other party backed out, saying that they no
longer want to do any interviews. He said he could bear the cost. Perhaps there
are people who had a hard time getting a job after throwing bricks (in the
lunar new year incident). These four words are fucking sombering. Independence
for Hong Kong is fucking sombering. But I will keep talking about this. So they
asked me whether I would come. Of course, given so many media are present, I’ve
really dug myself into this sinkhole together with them.

真係冇得避喇講真。點解呢？因為我有，我覺得喺度有股，有種好實在嘅感覺啦。喺呢個場
呀，即係呢個，唔係多人同少人嘅分別。我當然喺今日我都覺得係好多人㗎其實係，係好多
人架，出乎意料之外咁多人㗎。我有股實在嘅感覺就係我覺得同我以前去跟泛民主派去七一
遊行，六四集會，係好唔同㗎個感覺係。嗰股實在嘅感覺係嚟自咩嘅呢？咁雨傘革命，大家
仲會記得自己做過啲乜嘢啦，真係，嗰種感覺應該會記得啦。

There really is no escape. Why? Because I have a feeling, substantial feeling,
that this place. It is not a matter of numbers of participants. Of course
there’s a lot of people today. Really a lot. Far exceeded my expectation. The
feeling that I have is that it feels different from rallies I joined in the
past. The July-first rally, June-Fourth gathering etc. It feels quite
different. Where does this substantial feeling come from? During the umbrella
revolution, certainly everyone remembers what you’ve done. Really, you should
still remember that feeling.

去完唔知點解，我以前細細個，又或者細個啲個陣時，即係同一啲自己⋯⋯
So after I went, I was young, and when I was young, with people who are ...

(換擴音機)
(changing loudspeakers)

頭先講緊啲咩呢，即係講緊話喺佔領嘅時候呢，或者我細細個同同學去六四呀，去七一嗰陣
時呢，行完之後唔知大家都有無一個感覺就喺，好空虛呀行完之後、好唔開心呀行完之後。
唔知點囉行完之後，總之就好沮喪囉，如果大家敏感啲嘅可能會感覺到依樣野。喺雨傘革命
嘅時候呢，喺唔同嘅佔領區呢，即使喺金鐘咁樣，我個人比較唔係好鍾意，咁但係都好啦，
喺佔領區裏面呢，嗰種感覺喺好實在㗎。因為，你知道嗰個地方，個一刻喺你話緊事。點解
會有咁多人不滿或者咁多人覺得遊行呀，或者一啲過去嘅政團發起嘅行動會令人好空虛呀，
或者自己即喺好無力，好空虛呀依啲咁嘅野呢就喺，因為你知道你自己唔係話緊事呀，而人
天生喺會想掌握自己嘅將來㗎。

Where was I? Right, the Occupation (Umbrella Revolution). So when I was young,
at the June 4th (candlelight vigil) or July 1st (protest) with my friends,
after the whole thing I often had this feeling - don’t know if you guys feel
the same - emptiness, unhappiness, frustration. You might feel it if you are
more sensitive. But during the Occupation, at different zones, even the one in
Admiralty, which I don’t quite like, it felt more concrete and real. It’s
because you knew that you have say in that place and that moment. Why has there
been so much discontent, or feeling of emptiness and helplessness from
demonstrations or actions initiated by certain groups? It’s because you know
that you are not in charge, yet human beings instinctively want to take control
of their own future.

(擴音機修復）
(loudspeakers were fixed)

喂喂喂，做人就係咁一波三折㗎啦。唔好意思呀，因為器材問題。
Hello? Hello? Life really is full of twists and turns. Sorry about that, there
were some problems with the equipment.

咁，點解會有咁唔開心嘅日子呢，點解咁多人好迷茫呢？因為我哋唔喺係一個自己掌握緊自
己，講緊自己想講，或者真正了解嘅野。我哋以前聽民主回歸論，我哋以前聽六四、晚會、
民主、建立中國，跟住香港就會無啦啦得到解放咁樣。我仲記得香港民族黨未出世嘅時候呢
，我已經識得陳浩天㗎喇。我又喺個陣時係唔會知道陳浩天係會諗到陳浩天成為今日嘅陳浩
天㗎。佢個時搞左個組織叫《常識》咁樣。咁《常識》嘅有哋朋友我依家都見到啦亦都咁樣
，咁我就講過一樣野就喺，即喺同佢哋，都幫過佢哋嗌過一次咪喺旺角個度，個時佔領已經
完結左。咁我喺度嗰次就講左個問題就係，中國係唔俾香港獨立係因為佢認為香港唔係一個
民族咁樣。咁，呢個原因呢都唔錯㗎喎，即喺如果一個地方唔喺民族嘅話呢，佢不能成為一
個國家嘅，或者唔應該成為一個國家嘅，咁中國亦都唔喺一個國家喇。因為中國喺非常非常
非常之多嘅唔同嘅民族聚集埋一齊嘅一個地方嘅一片土地。當一個唔係國家嘅地方係有乜野
資格，去同我哋講話香港係無資格獨立？我哋作為一個國家嘅元素係比起中國遠遠係似一個
國家。我哋嘅，聚集喺呢度嘅愛國心，愛香港嘅心，愛香港國嘅心，喺遠遠比中國嗰啲爭住
移民，爭住去外國，黎香港買尿片、買奢侈品、買樓嘅人，我哋係愛我哋嘅國家好多，多佢
哋好多倍。依樣野就足以令我哋成為一個國家，因為我哋嘅愛國心喺凌駕於佢哋。反而喺佢
哋無資格同我哋講有無資格獨立。
So, why did we have such unhappy days, why did so many people feel disoriented?
Because we were not in control of ourselves, we were not speaking what we
wanted to speak, we did not truly understand what we were talking about. We
listened to the theory of “Democratic Return (to China)”, we heard them talk
about building a Democratic China in the June-fourth vigils, it was like Hong
Kong would be suddenly liberated once they succeeded in doing those things. I
remember the time before Chan Ho-tin founded the Hong Kong National Party. I
already knew him back then, but I didn’t know he would be the Chan Ho-tin we
all know today. He was building an organization called “Common Sense”. I see
members of “Common Sense” here in this rally today. One time, I was speaking in
Mongkok for them. By that time, the occupation in Mongkok was over. What I said
that time was, China does not allow Hong Kong Independence because Hong Kong is
not a nation. Well, this is not an invalid reason. So, if a place cannot or
should not become a country because it is not a nation, then China is not a
country either. Because China is formed by many many many different nations
living in that piece of land. This place, which is not a country -- what
standing does it have to tell us we do not meet the prerequisites for
independence? We have more country-like characteristics than China ever has.
For example, the patriotism we have here, the patriots of Hong Kong, are far
greater than those Chinese people who are rushing to emigrate, to go to foreign
countries, or to Hong Kong, to buy diapers, to buy luxury goods, to buy real
estate.  We love our own country much more than them. Just this one thing
suffices for us to become a country ourselves, because our patriotism dwarfs
theirs. They don’t have what it takes to tell us that we don’t have what it
takes to become independent.

一直以黎香港呢，都係比人話喺一個呢，借黎既地方，借黎既時間。啲人呢，好容易走嘅。
去八十年代，或者我哋嘅上一代呢，通常佢哋就會移民，然之後呢就話自己留條後路咁樣，
咁企得係度呢就無乜後路可以行㗎喇。
Throughout the years, Hong Kong has been deemed a “borrowed place” with
“borrowed time”. People leave easily. In the 1980s, or our parents’ generation,
people emigrated and considered it as a retreat route. So if you are standing
here, you don’t quite have any retreat routes to rely upon.


我覺得香港最，點解我都嗌雨傘革命呢？我好憎哋人嗌雨傘運動㗎，運動運動，出完之後就
無用㗎啦，係咪先？大家都知道出完汗之後都係無用㗎，運動喺唔會改變到乜野㗎喎。點解
叫雨傘革命呢？首先就喺我覺得佢革左泛民嘅命啦。
I think Hong Kong is most… Why do I call it the “Umbrella revolution”? I hate
people calling it “Umbrella Movement”. Movement (exercise), movement (exercise)
-- you’ll get nothing after you move, right? Everybody knows that sweating is
useless, movements (exercises) can’t change anything. Why do I call it the
“Umbrella Revolution”? Firstly, it’s because it will put an end to the life of
the Pan-Democrats. (wordplay with “revolution” which in Cantonese comprises
“put an end to”, and “life”).

呀主席催我喇。
Oh, the Chairperson is rushing me to end the speech.

即喺革左泛民嘅命啦，我哋唔再相信佢喇，我哋開始要搵一條新嘅路啦，唔喺泛民去主宰嘅
路啦，唔想再feel到嗰啲比佢帶住嘅空虛喇。
So, we put an end to the Pan-democrats. We don’t believe in them any more. We
need to find a new path, a path not dictated by the Pan-dems, I don’t want to
feel the emptiness again, the emptiness due to being put on a leash by them.

第二，就係佢終結咗嗰種香港人做無腳雀仔嘅嗰種習性，我希望係，因為我自己叫做個人希
望喺咁。因為有好多人會同你講，即係頭先羊羊都講啦，我都可以移民架，點解我唔移民呢
？點解我，即係好佬就唔同爛佬，嗰句野叫咩呀，即係「君子就不與嗰啲咁嘅⋯⋯」去咩㗎嘛
，咁依家中共就喺嗰個潑婦啦，佢搲爛塊面喇，通常啲人就係：「唉，唔好同佢計較，我走
」。我就喺唔撚走呀依家就係，你要攪嘅咁我哋就，你越攪我哋，我哋就越唔走。
Secondly, it ended Hongkongers’ habit of being a “feetless bird” - I hope it
did. Many people would tell you, like Nakade just did, that you could emigrate.
But why haven’t I left? Usually (as a Cantonese saying goes) good guys don’t
deal with hooligans… or a gentleman doesn’t deal with… well, so the Chinese
Communist Party is now that shrew, and she just completely turns hostile.
Normally people are like “Ay, let’s not haggle with her. I’ll back off”. But
nope, I’m not f---ing backing off. If you want to mess with us, the more you do
so, the more determined we are to stay. 

本來我都想走㗎喇，你就係好唔想佢哋選呀嘛，你就好唔想人講港獨呀嘛，你就喺好唔想人
哋搞依啲野呀嘛。咁依家出埋黎搞，同你搞，唔撚走添呀，本來都有得走㗎。我，即係走，
好容易之嘛，係咪先。但喺大家要諗下，走呢，你去到邊，例如你去到加拿大呢，加拿大成
街都係蝗蟲黎㗎喎。你以為可以走得出中國嘅手指罅咩？點解唔喺香港度建設一個無蝗蟲嘅
美好世界呢，如果咁樣講嘅話即喺。
Well, I wanted to leave this place too. But you don’t want them to stand for
the election, you don’t want people to talk about and push for Hong Kong
independence. So now we come barging out, we will fight against you, and we
don’t f---ing leave, even though we can. For me, leaving is easy, isn’t it? But
think carefully. If you were to leave, for example to Canada, “locusts”
(Chinese people) are everywhere in Canada. You think you can escape from the
grip of China? Why not construct a locust-free paradise in Hong Kong, to say
the least? 


點解你走黎走去，去諗，或者去求人哋「你庇護我啦你個政府，唔好收緊啲移民政策啦」。
點解我哋唔係喺香港，屬於自己嘅地方，最舒服嘅地方，去建立一個無人再可以攪到我哋嘅
地方，無人可以再羞辱我哋嘅地方。呢啲唔喺羞辱咩？大家都喺受到羞辱所以出黎㗎咋嘛。
本來我有得選㗎，點解你唔俾我選啫？係咪？你有乜野權力去講，去分析我喺咪真心擁護基
本法呢喺咪先？啲人唱埋「I Love Basic
Law」都唔俾佢入㗎喎。點解呢？因為就係佢喺咁呀嘛。但喺我地唔走，負隅頑抗，死「lur
」，就地打滾，點都好，只要你唔走，你就霸唔到我撻地。你唔走，你霸唔到我呢個身位。
我唔走，喺因為我唔想認可佢嘅侵略喺成功咗。你嘅侵略永遠都唔會成功㗎因為我哋喺仲企
喺度呀。

Why are you leaving this, leaving that, to hope, or to beg other countries,
“Please have your government protect me, please don’t restrict the immigration
laws”. Why don’t we stay in Hong Kong, the place that belongs to us, the most
comfortable place, to establish a society where nobody can molest us, nobody
can insult us? Isn’t this an insult? All of you came here because you felt
insulted. I was going to run for the election, why didn’t you let me? Right?
What authority do you have, to inquire whether I am bona-fide upholding the
Basic Law? Somebody sang “I Love Basic Law”, but they still banned us from the
election. Why? Because this is how they are. But we are not going to leave. We
are going to build our base here and resist, shamelessly resist, rolling on the
floor, whatever. As long as you (we) don’t leave, you won’t be able to claim
our land. As long as you (we) don’t leave, you won’t be able to claim the land
under me. I will not leave, because I don’t want to acknowledge their
successful invasion. Your invasion will never succeed, because I am still
standing here.


仲有咁多人出黎話香港獨立呀支持係，依家唔喺話爭取民主個啲一定啱𠺢嗰啲野呀，有高度
風險㗎依個政治立場係依家。係好危險，係要，即係要作出呢個犧牲。只係諗呢個支持呢個
政治立場，仲未講咩叫行動呀。只係支持已經要作出犧牲，點解會有咁撚多人呀？點解佢哋
咁憤怒呀？係應該憤怒㗎。你覺得唔應該，香港係唔應該，中國係無資格去管治香港，只有
香港人先有資格管治香港。所以你會感覺到憤怒，所以你會感覺到唔開心，所以你會出黎。

Also, many people say that, supporting Hong Kong Independence is not like
fighting for democracy, or those ideals that are obviously legitimate. We’re
talking about something with high political risk. It is dangerous, so
sacrifices must be made. We have to make sacrifices even to just think about
this political stance, we’re not talking about any action yet. We need to make
sacrifices even if we were just showing our support, but why are there so many
people here? Why are they so angry? They ought to be angry. You think that Hong
Kong ought not to be, China has no standing to govern Hong Kong. Only the
people of Hong Kong have the standing to govern Hong Kong. That’s why you feel
angry, that’s why you feel unhappy, that’s why you’ve come here.

所以佢哋會即係會，呀主席呀佢哋，其實即係都係迫上梁山。我哋和平既日子係過得好多，
以前，所以我哋已經肌肉開始退化，但係我哋要急起直追。對方係好緊要好犀利嘅一個對手
。但係佢既弱點就係我哋嘅長處，就係我地先喺呢度土生土長。只要我哋唔離開呢度就會提
供源源不絕嘅力量畀我哋。咁所以就我同佢哋上咗賊船啦，或者唔係賊船啦，上咗呢隻船啦
咁樣。咁呀希望大家都一齊嚟搭呢隻船因為，舊嗰撻地其實就快陸沉㗎啦大家唔係唔知道㗎
。我喺度諗緊，吖究竟泛民隻船好吖定我地隻船好呢咁樣，我喺我用有限既智慧，我諗黎諗
去諗咗呢幾年我都係無辦法諗，無辦法去，唔去支持呢個香港獨立架，因為佢唔係一個仁慈
或者一個會畀你講獨立嘅國家，咁所以佢唔畀嘅時候你更加要做呀。因為如果我地唔做嘅話
呢，我哋會，我哋
永遠都咁唔滿足咁唔開心架我覺得係。即係雨傘革命既時候呢，嗰個好充實㗎，就係因為我
地知道係為緊自己既地方而打拼。你賺咗啲錢返黎洗咗佢，咁嗰件事係無，唔會夠企係度咁
實在嗰個感覺，雖然係會唔知道之後會面臨啲咩事，但anyway啦，我就同佢哋⋯⋯受到佢哋嘅
感召所以落咗水喇。咁佢哋時間就已經差唔多，希望大家夠韌力，唔好咁易畀佢攪到你灰心
，你灰完心之後聽日再走出黎支持香港獨立。
That's why they, Chairman, those people, they are forced by the government to
join the resistance. We enjoyed a long period of peace in the past, so our
muscles have already gone soft. But we must catch up right now. On the other
side is a very formidable opponent. But their weakness is our strength -- we
are born and raised here. As long as we don’t leave, this place will provide
never-ending power to us. So I joined their pirate ship, or maybe it’s not a
pirate ship, so I joined their ship. I hope everybody will come onboard,
because that continent is sinking, do you know that? I was thinking, whether
the ship of the pan-dems is better, or whether our ship is better. With my
limited wisdom, I thought long and hard, and I still cannot stop myself from
thinking, from supporting Hong Kong Independence. Because they are not a
benevolent country, they will never let you talk about independence. If they
don’t let you, all the more reason to do it. Because, if we don’t do this, we
will never be satisfied or happy, I think. During the Umbrella Revolution, it
felt substantial, it felt real, because we knew we were fighting for our own
land. If you earn money and simply spend it, it doesn’t feel as substantial as
standing here, even though I don’t know what will happen afterwards. But
anyway, I was moved by their appeal, so I have joined them. And their time is
almost up, I hope everybody will be tough, don’t let them make you despair so
easily, even if you despair, once you stop feeling bad, come out and support
Hong Kong Independence.

香港獨立！(香港獨立！）香港一定獨立！（香港一定獨立！）多謝大家。
Independence for Hong Kong! Independence for Hong Kong for sure! Thanks
everyone.

[ The English translation is released under Creative Commons, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 ]

